                                              Computing Equilibrium beyond Unilateral Deviation

                                         Mingyang Liu 1 , Gabriele Farina1 , Asuman Ozdaglar 1
                                         1 LIDS, EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                         1 {liumy19,gfarina,asuman}@mit.edu




                                                                                                     Abstract
arXiv:2604.28186v1 [cs.GT] 30 Apr 2026




                                                Most familiar equilibrium concepts, such as Nash and correlated equilibrium, guarantee only
                                                that no single player can improve their utility by deviating unilaterally. They offer no guaran-
                                                tees against profitable coordinated deviations by coalitions. Although the literature proposes
                                                solution concepts that provide stability against multilateral deviations (e.g., strong Nash and
                                                coalition-proof equilibrium), these generally fail to exist. In this paper, we study an alter-
                                                native solution concept that minimizes coalitional deviation incentives, rather than requiring
                                                them to vanish, and is therefore guaranteed to exist. Specifically, we focus on minimizing
                                                the average gain of a deviating coalition, and extend the framework to weighted-average and
                                                maximum-within-coalition gains. In contrast, the minimum-gain analogue is shown to be
                                                computationally intractable. For the average-gain and maximum-gain objectives, we prove a
                                                lower bound on the complexity of computing such an equilibrium and present an algorithm
                                                that matches this bound. Finally, we use our framework to solve the Exploitability Welfare
                                                Frontier (EWF), the maximum attainable social welfare subject to a given exploitability (the
                                                maximum gain over all unilateral deviations).



                                         1     Introduction

                                         Most equilibrium concepts studied so far, such as Nash equilibrium (NE) (Nash, 1950), correlated equi-
                                         librium (CE) (Aumann, 1974), coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE) (Moulin and Vial, 1978), and Stackel-
                                         berg equilibrium (Von Stackelberg, 2010), guarantee only that no individual player has a unilateral utility
                                         improving deviation. However, they offer no guarantees when multiple players deviate simultaneously
                                         by forming a coalition. In this paper, we address the following question:

                                                What is an appropriate notion for capturing multilateral deviations, and how can it be computed
                                                efficiently?

                                         Previous notions that address coalition deviations, such as strong NE (Aumann, 1959)1 and coalition-
                                         proof equilibrium (Bernheim et al., 1987), mostly fail to exist in general games (unlike NE). Therefore,
                                         instead of searching for a joint strategy immune to all coalition deviations, we focus on computing a joint
                                         strategy that minimizes the maximum average gain2 achievable by any coalition through joint deviation.
                                             1 In this paper, we use the term strong equilibrium to broadly refer to any equilibrium concept that considers multilateral devia-

                                         tions.
                                             2 Our framework also extends to coalition objectives based on weighted sums or weighted averages of players’ deviation gains,

                                         as well as objectives based on the maximum within-coalition deviation gain. In contrast, the corresponding minimum-gain variant
                                         is computationally intractable even for small games. See Theorem 6.4 and Remark 7.5 for details.



                                                                                                           1
In other words, we aim to compute the most stable strategy profile, even if a perfectly stable one does
not exist. We refer to this notion as the Minimum Average-Strong Equilibrium (MASE).
The difficulty of this optimization problem naturally depends on the complexity of the interactions
between players. To formalize this, we introduce the Utility Dependency Graph, G(V , E ), where each
player is a vertex. An edge connects two players, i and j, if and only if there is some player k whose
utility is affected by the actions of both i and j. Intuitively, an edge (i, j) indicates that the actions
of i and j jointly influence some player’s utility, and hence that coalitional deviations involving these
players can create nontrivial joint effects. The graph G provides a clear map of the game’s interaction
structure, and its properties can help us understand the computational complexity of finding the MASE.
For games with simple interaction structures (e.g., a sparse Utility Dependency Graph), one might expect
to compute the MASE efficiently.
We first show that computing the MASE is computationally challenging in the general case. We establish
two key hardness results that delineate the problem’s complexity.
First, the problem is fundamentally harder than finding equilibria like NE or CE. In those cases, we are
solving a feasibility problem: finding a strategy where the maximum gain from deviating is at most zero.
For MASE, we must solve an optimization problem: minimizing this maximum gain. This distinction
is crucial, and we show that even for the simplest case of single-player deviations (i.e., coalitions of
size one)3 , approximating the MASE value to within a factor that is inverse polynomial in the number
of players is NP-hard. This indicates that even without considering complex coalitions, the problem is
intractable without additional assumptions on the game’s structure.
Second, we show that this complexity is intrinsically tied to the structure of the Utility Dependency
Graph. Building on the strong exponential time hypothesis (SETH) (Impagliazzo and Paturi, 2001) (see
Theorem 6.3 for details), we prove that solving MASE requires time that is at least exponential in the
treewidth4 of the Utility Dependency Graph. This holds even when we only consider coalitions of a
constant size. This result demonstrates that the treewidth is a fundamental barrier, and an exponential
dependence on it is unavoidable.
Finally, we complement the lower bound with an algorithm whose running time has exponential depen-
dence only on the treewidth of the Utility Dependency Graph, rather than on the number of players.
This demonstrates that our hardness result is tight and establishes the treewidth as the definitive pa-
rameter characterizing the complexity of computing the MASE. While the problem is hard in general, it
becomes tractable for games where the underlying interaction structure is not too complex. The key idea
of our algorithm involves breaking the game into small, overlapping, weakly interacting parts, solving
the problem locally on each part, and then combining these local solutions consistently.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
   1. Complexity characterization. We establish lower bounds on the computational complexity of
      computing MASE, showing that an exponential dependence on the treewidth of the Utility Depen-
      dency Graph is unavoidable (Theorem 6.3). We further show that the minimum-gain variant over
      coalitions is computationally intractable even for small games (Theorem 6.4).
   2. Algorithmic contribution. We design an algorithm for computing MASE whose running time
      matches the lower bound in its exponential dependence on the treewidth of the Utility Dependency
      Graph, rather than depending exponentially on the number of players.
   3. Application to welfare-exploitability tradeoffs. We show how our framework can be used to com-
      pute socially optimal strategies subject to a prescribed exploitability budget, thereby characterizing
      the exploitability welfare frontier (Section 9).
   3 Restricting to singleton coalitions aligns the deviation model with unilateral deviations, but it still differs from NE: NE only

asks whether there exists a feasible solution with deviation gain ≤ 0, whereas MASE minimizes the deviation gain
   4 Treewidth can be thought of as a formal measure of how sparse and "tree-like" a graph is.




                                                                 2
Technical Overview. In Section 7, we formulate the strong-equilibrium computation problem as a two-
player zero-sum meta-game between a correlator and a deviator. The correlator chooses a correlated
joint strategy for all players in the original game, whereas the deviator chooses a coalition together with
a joint deviation for that coalition. The game is zero-sum because the correlator seeks to minimize the
coalition’s gain from deviation, while the deviator seeks to maximize it.
The main computational challenge is that the action spaces of both players in this meta-game are expo-
nentially large: the correlator’s actions are joint action profiles, and the deviator’s actions are coalition-
deviation pairs. Standard game-solving approaches, such as no-regret learning (Hazan et al., 2016)
and linear programming (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden, 2008), typically scale with the largest action
space among the players, so applying them directly is computationally intractable. To overcome this
obstacle, we instantiate no-regret learning with Follow the Perturbed Leader (FTPL) (Hazan et al., 2016).
Each FTPL update reduces to optimizing a linear objective over the relevant simplex, whose optimum
is attained at an extreme point. Thus, it suffices to compute and store a pure strategy at each iteration
rather than maintain the full exponential-dimensional distribution.
Finally, we solve the resulting linear optimization oracle via dynamic programming over a tree decom-
position of the Utility Dependency Graph. This yields a running time that is exponential only in the
treewidth of the Utility Dependency Graph, rather than in the number of players. Consequently, the
algorithm is efficient for games whose Utility Dependency Graph has bounded treewidth. Moreover, its
exponential dependence on the treewidth matches the lower bound in Theorem 6.3.


2    Related Work

In this section, we review the literature on strong equilibrium from three perspectives: existence, time
complexity, and computation methods.


Existence of Strong Equilibrium. Aumann (1959) introduced the strong NE, where no coalition (a
nonempty subset of players) can deviate in a way that strictly improves the utility of all its members.
However, even in simple two-player games such as Prisoner’s Dilemma (Luce and Raiffa, 1957), a strong
NE does not exist when players can deviate simultaneously. To address this, Bernheim et al. (1987)
proposed the coalition-proof equilibrium, which restricts the set of deviations (see Section 5 for details).
Yet, this concept also fails to guarantee existence, already in three-player games (Bernheim et al., 1987).
More recently, Rahn and Schäfer (2015) studied the notion of α-approximate k-equilibrium, where no
coalition of size at most k can deviate so that every member’s utility becomes at least α ≥ 1 times their
original utility. They further showed that such equilibria exist in graph coordination games only under
specific conditions, for instance, when α ≥ 2. Motivated by these non-existence results, we instead focus
on minimizing the maximum average gain from coalition deviations (MASE), a quantity that is always
well defined.


Complexity of Strong Equilibrium. Since a strong NE degenerates to an NE when only singleton coali-
tions are considered, computing a strong NE is PPAD-hard in general (Daskalakis et al., 2009; Chen and
Deng, 2006). Beyond computation, Conitzer and Sandholm (2008) showed that even deciding whether
a strong NE exists is NP-complete in two-player symmetric games, and Berthelsen and Hansen (2022)
further established that the problem is ∃R-complete for three-player games. Similarly, Rahn and Schäfer
(2015) proved that determining the existence of a strong NE is NP-complete in graph coordination games,
even when restricting attention to coalitions of constant size. To the best of our knowledge, however,
no hardness results are known for computing strong equilibria when correlation on the joint strategy is


                                                      3
allowed, i.e., a correlated strategy immune to coalition deviations. In this paper, we show that computing
a correlated strategy that minimizes the average gain from coalition deviations is NP-hard. Moreover,
we establish a lower bound based on the treewidth of the Utility Dependency Graph, demonstrating an
inherent computational barrier in solving the MASE considered here.


Computation of Strong Equilibrium. Holzman and Law-Yone (1997) and Rozenfeld and Tennenholtz
(2006) developed algorithms to compute strong NE and correlated strong equilibria in congestion games
under certain conditions in polynomial time. Rahn and Schäfer (2015) showed that a strong NE can
also be computed in polynomial time when the graph coordination game is defined on a tree. In con-
trast, Gatti et al. (2013) proposed a spatial branch-and-bound algorithm for computing strong NE more
generally, but its runtime is exponential. Along the same lines, Nessah and Tian (2014) also provided a
computationally intractable algorithm. Of independent interest, Papadimitriou and Roughgarden (2008)
introduced an efficient algorithm for computing optimal CE, e.g., a CE that maximizes the social wel-
fare, in graphical games (Kearns et al., 2001; Kakade et al., 2003) with bounded treewidth, using linear
programming. In this paper, we develop a new algorithm for computing MASE based on no-regret
learning, with a time complexity that matches the lower bound dictated by the treewidth of the Utility
Dependency Graph.


3     Preliminaries

For any vector x ∈ Rn , we use xi to denote its ith element and ∥x∥ p to denote its p-norm. By default, ∥x∥
refers to the 2-norm. For a positive integer N, let [ N ] := 1, 2, . . . , N. We denote the (n − 1)-dimensional
probability simplex by ∆n := {x ∈ [0, 1]n : ∑in=1 xi = 1}. More generally, for any discrete set S, let |S|
denote its cardinality and write ∆S for the probability simplex over S, whose coordinates are indexed
by elements of S (e.g., ∆n = ∆[n] ). Similarly, RS denotes the |S|-dimensional real vector space with
coordinates indexed by S. For any set S1 , S2 , S1 × S2 denotes the Cartesian product of sets S1 and S2 .
Finally, we let 1(argument) denote the indicator function, which equals 1 if the argument is true and 0
otherwise.


3.1    Games

A game is represented as a tuple ( N, {Ai }iN=1 , {Ui }iN=1 , S), where
    • N is the number of players.
                                                                   N
                                                                          ×
    • Ai is the action set of player i. For convenience, let A := i=1 Ai denote the joint action set.
    • Ui : A → [0, 1] is the utility function of player i ∈ [ N ].
    • S is the set of coalitions, which is a set of subsets of players. For example, if only unilat-
      eral deviations are allowed (as in Nash equilibrium or coarse correlated equilibrium), then S =
      {{1} , {2} , . . . , { N }}.
For notational simplicity, for any subset of players S ⊆ [ N ], we write AS :=               ×i∈S Ai . Throughout the
paper, let A := maxi∈[ N ] |Ai | denote the size of the largest action set.
For any joint action a ∈ A, let ai denote the action of player i, and let a−i = ( a1 , a2 , . . . , ai−1 , ai+1 , . . . a N )
be the joint action of all players except i. More generally, for any subset S ⊆ [ N ], we write a−S for the
joint action of players outside S.




                                                             4
                                                 Confess (C)    Defect (D)
                                 Confess (C)      (0.6, 0.6)       (0, 1)
                                 Defect (D)         (1, 0)       (0.2, 0.2)

Table 1: Utility matrix of Prisoner’s Dilemma. Each entry ( a, b) denotes the payoff of the row player (a)
and the column player (b).


3.2   Succinct Representation

This paper focuses on multi-player games with a succinct representation. Specifically, each utility func-
tion Ui can 
            be encoded using
                              a number of bits polynomial in the number of players N, rather than
requiring O N ∏iN=1 |Ai | bits as in the general case. Examples of succinctly represented games include
polymatrix games (Howson Jr, 1972; Eaves, 1973) and congestion games (Rosenthal, 1973). Throughout
the paper, we call an algorithm efficient if its running time is polynomial in N, as opposed to poly-
nomial in ∏iN=1 |Ai |. We focus on succinct games because MASE can otherwise be solved by a linear
program whose size grows exponentially with N (see Section A). Moreover, the study of strong equilib-
rium is particularly compelling in large games, where exponential dependence on N is computationally
prohibitive.


4     Minimum Average-Strong Equilibrium (MASE)

Several notions of strong equilibrium have been proposed, including the strong Nash equilibrium (NE)
(Aumann, 1959), the sum-strong NE (Hoefer, 2013) (no improvement on the total gain of any coalition),
and coalition-proof equilibrium (Bernheim et al., 1987) (permits only self-enforcing deviations, see Sec-
tion 5). However, none of these notions are guaranteed to exist in general games. To build intuition,
we first illustrate why a strong NE does not exist in Prisoner’s Dilemma. Later, we will show that the
problem persists even when correlated strategies are allowed.

Lemma 4.1. In Prisoner’s Dilemma, no strong Nash nor strong correlated equilibrium exists when S =
{{1} , {2} , {1, 2}} is the set of all non-empty subsets of players.

Proof. Since correlated equilibria include all Nash equilibria, it suffices to examine strong correlated
equilibria. A strong correlated equilibrium is a correlated joint strategy where no subset of players (a
coalition) can jointly deviate in a way that strictly improves the utility of all its members.
As shown in Table 1, any strategy with positive weight on (C, C ), (C, D ), ( D, C ) yields a profitable devi-
ation for at least one singleton coalition, {1} or {2}. Conversely, placing all weight on ( D, D ) creates a
deviation to (C, C ) that benefits the coalition {1, 2}. Thus, no strong NE or strong correlated equilibrium
exists.

In Lemma 5.1, we further show that even the weaker notion, the coalition-proof equilibrium, may fail to
exist in normal-form games, even when correlation is allowed.
The failure of strong equilibria stems from the fact that a single player may belong to multiple coalitions
whose objectives are incompatible, so no strategy can simultaneously eliminate profitable deviations for
all coalitions. Motivated by this, rather than requiring no profitable deviation exists, we instead look for
a joint strategy that minimizes the coalitional incentive to deviate, which always exists by the Weierstrass
theorem.



                                                      5
For each coalition S ∈ S , we adopt a transferable-utility viewpoint: after a deviation, members of S
may redistribute utility internally. Under this assumption, a coalition’s incentive to deviate is naturally
summarized by its aggregate gain. To make this notion comparable across coalitions of different sizes,
we evaluate it on a per-capita basis by averaging over the players in S. This motivates the following
definition of the Minimum Average-Strong Equilibrium (MASE). Extensions to the weighted sum (average)
and to the maximum within-coalition gain are discussed in Remark 7.5. By contrast, extending the
criterion to the minimum within-coalition gain is computationally intractable even in small games, as
shown in Theorem 6.4. Let Π ⊆ ∆A be the set of joint strategies under consideration. Then a MASE
π ∗ ∈ Π is any solution to

                                                              1
                             π ∗ ∈ argmin max max                 ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)],
                                               S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                                                                                                             (MASE)
                                      π ∈Π

where the expression above is referred to as the coalition exploitability of π. To make the solution concept
computationally tractable, and to allow coordinated behavior, we work with correlated joint strategies,
rather than restricting attention to independent mixed strategies as in NE. Accordingly, throughout the
remainder of the paper we take Π = ∆A . This choice helps avoid the computational hardness inherited
from NE: when the coalition family S contains only singleton coalitions, any strong-equilibrium notion
reduces to the usual unilateral-deviation requirement, i.e., it collapses to NE. Since computing an NE
is PPAD-hard even for two-player normal-form games (Chen and Deng, 2006; Daskalakis et al., 2009),
insisting on an equilibrium notion built on independent strategies would generally be intractable.
Intuitively, (MASE) selects the correlated strategy π ∈ ∆A that minimizes the maximum average gain
attainable by any coalition across all possible coalitions. If this value is less than or equal to zero, then
no coalition can simultaneously deviate in a way that yields a strictly positive total gain.
A correlated strategy π ∈ ∆A is called an ϵ-MASE if, for every MASE π ∗ ∈ ∆A ,

                                                   1
                                    max max            ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                                    S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S

                                                   1
                                 ≤ max max             ∑ Ea∼π∗ [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] + ϵ.
                                    S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S


A strong Nash equilibrium requires that for any deviating coalition, at least one member does not strictly
improve their utility. In contrast, ϵ-MASE aims to minimize the average improvement over all players
within any given coalition. From another perspective, ϵ-MASE minimizes the incentive to deviate, even
when coalition members can freely reallocate utility within the coalition.


5     Relations among Equilibria

In this section, we delineate the relationships among various strong equilibrium concepts, including
strong CCE (the counterpart to strong NE (Aumann, 1959)),5 strictly strong CCE (the counterpart to
strictly strong NE (van Megen et al., 1996)), and coalition-proof CCE (the counterpart to coalition-proof
NE (Bernheim et al., 1987)).
To align with the standard equilibrium requirement that no player or coalition can gain by deviating, we
   5 Here, strong CCE refers to robustness against coalition deviations, analogous to strong NE. This distinguishes it from the

definition in Anagnostides et al. (2022), where "strong" implies that any unilateral deviation strictly decreases the deviating player’s
utility.




                                                                   6
say that a joint strategy π is a MASE≤0 if it satisfies6

                                                  1
                                  max max             ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] ≤ 0.
                                   S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                                                                                                   (MASE≤0 )

This notion coincides with the sum-strong correlated equilibrium (Hoefer, 2013) (no improvement on
the total gain of any coalition), as the sign of the aggregate deviation gain is invariant to scaling by the
coalition size (i.e., the average gain is non-positive if and only if the sum is non-positive).
We can unify these equilibrium notions under a single generalized definition. Note that while standard
definitions assume S contains all non-empty subsets of [ N ] for strictly strong, strong, and coalition-proof
CCE, we generalize S in this work to represent an arbitrary collection of subsets to align with the MASE
framework. The unified condition is given by:
                                                                                
                      max max f       Ea∼π,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] i∈S ≤ 0,                  (5.1)
                              S∈S π̂S ∈CS

where
                                                       
                                    ∆AS , |G1 | ∑ g∈G g
                                   
                                                                                      MASE≤0
                                                                          
                                    AS
                                       ∆ , maxg∈G g − 1 ming′ ∈G g′ < 0
                                   
                                                                                       strictly strong CCE
                 (CS , f ( G )) :=                                                                                        (5.2)
                                      ∆AS , ming∈G g
                                                       
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                                                                      strong CCE
                                                                          
                                                                    g∈ G g
                                    self-enforcing strategies, min                    coalition-proof CCE

The definition of self-enforcing strategies is discussed later in this section. For MASE≤0 , maximizing
over π̂S ∈ ∆AS in (5.1) is equivalent to maximizing directly over âS ∈ AS in (MASE). This is because the
function f corresponding to MASE≤0 is linear in π̂S , so its maximum over the simplex is attained at an
extreme point (vertex), i.e., at a deterministic choice π̂S with π̂S (âS ) = 1 for some âS ∈ AS .
For strictly strong CCE, since Ui ∈ [0, 1], each gain g ∈ [−1, 1], and thus maxg∈G g ≤ 1. Hence, we have

                                  f (G) ≤ 0     if and only if       max g ≤ 0 or min g′ < 0.                             (5.3)
                                                                     g∈ G         g′ ∈ G

Indeed, if ming′ ∈G g′ < 0, then f ( G ) = maxg∈G g − 1 ≤ 0 automatically. Otherwise, ming′ ∈G g′ ≥ 0 and
the condition reduces to maxg∈G g ≤ 0, which forces g ≤ 0 for all g ∈ G. Equivalently, f ( G ) ≤ 0 fails
exactly when ming′ ∈G g′ ≥ 0 and maxg∈G g > 0, i.e., when a deviation weakly benefits every coalition
member and strictly benefits at least one.


Distinction between strictly strong and strong CCE. A strictly strong CCE rules out any coalition
deviation that makes all members weakly better off and at least one member strictly better off. A strong
CCE rules out any coalition deviation that makes every member strictly better off.


Distinction between coalition-proof and strong CCE. The primary distinction between strong CCE
and coalition-proof CCE lies in the set of admissible deviations. For strong CCE, any deviation within
∆AS is considered feasible.
In contrast, coalition-proof CCE restricts the set of feasible deviations to those that are self-enforcing.
Specifically, a deviation is admissible only if it constitutes a coalition-proof equilibrium in the reduced
game restricted to players in S, holding the strategies of players in [ N ] \ S fixed at π−S . Further details
   6 An ϵ-MASE is an ϵ-approximate minimizer of the coalition exploitability, whereas MASE≤0 is a joint strategy whose coalition

exploitability is at most zero.


                                                                 7
                                                 MASE≤0
                                             (Sum-Strong CCE)




                                            Strictly Strong CCE

                                                  Strong CCE

                                            Coalition-Proof CCE

                 Figure 1: The relationship between different strong equilibrium notions.


are provided in Bernheim et al. (1987). Consequently, since the set of deviations in coalition-proof CCE
is a subset of that in strong CCE, any strong CCE is inherently a coalition-proof CCE. Relations between
these strong equilibria are summarized in Figure 1.
In Lemma 5.1, we extend the non-existence result for (non-correlated) coalition equilibria in Bernheim
et al. (1987) to establish the non-existence of coalition-proof CCE, a class that includes all coalition
equilibria.
Lemma 5.1 (Non-existence of Coalition-Proof CCE). Coalition-proof CCE may not exist, even in a three-
player normal-form game.

The proof is postponed to Section B.
The non-existence possibility in Lemma 5.1 automatically implies the non-existence of MASE≤0 , strictly
strong CCE, and strong CCE. This motivates our focus on minimizing the deviation gap rather than
seeking a joint strategy that strictly achieves a non-positive deviation gap.


6    Hardness of Computing MASE

Recall that we call an algorithm efficient if it runs in time polynomial in N. In this section, we first
establish the computational hardness of computing ϵ-MASE.
Theorem 6.1. Computing ϵ-MASE is NP-hard, even when S only contains singletons (coalitions of size
one) and 1/ϵ is polynomial in the number of players.

The proof is deferred to Section C.1. Importantly, Theorem 6.1 highlights a fundamental distinction
from the case of CCE, which can be computed efficiently (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden, 2008). The
reason is that for CCE it suffices to find a correlated strategy π ∈ ∆A such that the deviation gap,
maxi∈[ N ] maxâi ∈Ai Ea∼π [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)], is less or equal to zero, whereas here we must find a strat-
egy that minimizes the gap. Together with the linear programming characterization in Section A, this


                                                         8
implies that computing ϵ-MASE is actually NP-complete. In fact, Anagnostides et al. (2025) recently
showed that even minimizing the average deviation gap of CCE across all players (instead of the maxi-
mum gap considered here) is also NP-complete.


6.1    Lower Bound on the Exponential Dependence on Treewidth

Next, we present a more refined hardness result: a lower bound for computing MASE. To do so, we first
formalize the notion of dependencies among players’ utilities.
For each player i ∈ [ N ], define the relevant set N (i ) ⊆ [ N ] consisting of all players j ∈ [ N ] (including
j = i) such that the action of j can affect the utility of i. Formally, j ∈ [ N ] is in N (i ) if and only if there
exist a− j ∈ A− j and a j , a′j ∈ A j such that Ui ( a j , a− j ) ̸= Ui ( a′j , a− j ). This leads to the following graph
representation.

Definition 6.2 (Utility Dependency Graph). The utility dependence graph G = (V , E ) is an undirected
graph with vertex set V = [ N ] representing the players, and edge set E = k∈[ N ] {(i, j) | i, j ∈ N (k ), i ̸= j}.
                                                                          S




Since Ui depends only on the actions of players in N (i ), we may equivalently write Ui (aC ) = Ui (aC , a′−C )
for arbitrary a′−C ∈ A−C , where C ⊇ N (i ). It is worth noting that this definition differs from the graph
of a graphical game (Kakade et al., 2003; Kearns et al., 2001). Here, players i and j are connected if both
influence the utility of some other player k, even if i and j do not directly affect each other. Whereas in
graphical games, two players i and j are connected if and only if at least one can influence the other’s
utility.
With this graph structure in place, we can connect the hardness of computing MASE to the treewidth of
G . Intuitively, treewidth measures how close a graph is to being a tree: the treewidth of G is one when G
is a tree, and it is N − 1 when G is a complete graph. Throughout this section, let O ∗ denote asymptotic
complexity with factors polynomial in N suppressed.

Theorem 6.3 (Treewidth). Suppose a tree decomposition of the Utility Dependency Graph is given.
Under the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) (Impagliazzo and Paturi, 2001),7 (MASE) cannot
be computed in O ∗ (( A − ζ )tw(G) ) for any ζ > 0. Moreover, under the additional assumption that
BPP=P,8 9N1                                              ∗         tw(G) ) for any ζ > 0.
            2 -approximate MASE cannot be computed in O (( A − ζ )


The proof is deferred to Section C.2. For approximate MASEs we assume BPP=P, which is standard in
the literature (Arora and Barak, 2009), because the reduction involves sampling joint actions from the
approximate MASE. Since enumerating all a ∈ A is computationally infeasible, we rely on randomized
sampling. This yields only a randomized algorithm for the original NP-hard problem, and the assump-
tion BPP=P ensures that such a randomized algorithm can be derandomized into a deterministic one,
completing the reduction. Finally, we note that the argument can be extended to the maximum-within-
coalition variant, showing that its computation also requires exponential dependence on the treewidth
of the Utility Dependency Graph.
Theorem 6.3 shows that the computational complexity of solving MASE is inherently tied to the treewidth
of the Utility Dependency Graph. Intuitively, when the treewidth is large, each player’s utility depends
on many others, making even the evaluation of coalition deviations computationally demanding (enu-
merating over all âS ∈ AS ). In contrast, when the treewidth is small, such as zero (each player’s utility
  7 SETH assumes that SAT cannot be solved in O ∗ ((2 − ζ )n ) for any ζ> 0, where n is the number of variables in the SAT
instance.
   8 This assumption implies that any problem with a polynomial-time randomized algorithm also has a polynomial-time deter-

ministic algorithm.


                                                             9
depends only on their own action), computing MASE becomes trivial, since each player’s utility can be
maximized independently. In polymatrix games (Eaves, 1973), the treewidth of the Utility Dependency
Graph can be bounded by that of its corresponding graph. Further details are provided in Section I.
Furthermore, we show that the minimum-value analogue of strong CCE is NP-hard to approximate, even
in small games whose joint action space is only polynomial in the number of players and the treewidth
of the Utility Dependency Graph is two.
Theorem 6.4. Approximating
             min max max min Ea∼π,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]              (Minimum Strong CCE)
            π ∈∆A S∈S π̂S ∈∆AS i ∈S

within an additive error of N12 is NP-hard, even for a small game in which the joint action set size |A| is
polynomial in the number of players N and the treewidth of the Utility Dependency Graph is two.

The proof is deferred to Section C.3. Theorem 6.4 shows that computing (Minimum Strong CCE) is
intractable unless P = NP. Accordingly, throughout the remainder of the paper, we focus on aggregation
rules based on the (weighted) average and the maximum deviation gain.
Remark 6.5. The hard instance in Theorem 6.1 has a joint action set whose size is exponential in the
number of players, whereas the instance in Theorem 6.4 does not. This distinction is important: by the
linear-programming formulation in Section A, MASE can be computed in time polynomial in |A| for
any finite game. In contrast, Theorem 6.4 rules out even an approximation algorithm whose running
time is polynomial in |A| for (Minimum Strong CCE), unless P = NP. Therefore, this hardness cannot be
attributed to the size of the joint action space. Rather, it stems from the intrinsic min-max-min structure
of the minimum strong CCE objective.


7     Efficient Computation of MASE

Although an (MASE) lives in an exponentially large space (of size |A|), it can still be computed efficiently.
This is because the equilibrium always admits a compact representation.
Theorem 7.1 (Efficient Representation). For any ϵ ≥ 0, at least one of the ϵ-MASE can be represented
as a linear combination of ∑S∈S |S| · Atw(G) + 1 pure strategies, where tw(G) is the treewidth of Utility
Dependency Graph.

The proof is deferred to Section D. Intuitively, Theorem 7.1 shows that there must be an ϵ-MASE that
always has a sparse representation. Since each pure strategy can be encoded by the corresponding joint
action rather than by a full vector in ∆A , this sparsity provides a structural explanation for why efficient
computation is possible. We emphasize, however, that Theorem 7.1 is not used as a subroutine in the
algorithm developed below. Rather, it serves as intuition for the compactness that the algorithm exploits.


7.1   Meta-Game between the Correlator and Deviator

To compute an (MASE), we reformulate the problem as a meta-game between two players: the correlator
and the deviator (Hart and Schmeidler, 1989). The correlator chooses the correlated strategy π ∈ ∆A ,
while the deviator selects deviations. The game is zero-sum: the correlator aims to minimize the coali-
tion’s gain from deviation, and the deviator aims to maximize it. Formally:
                                          min     max       F (π, µ),                                   (7.1)
                                         π ∈∆A µ∈∆×S∈S AS



                                                     10
where
                                                   µ(S, âS )
                       F (π, µ) := ∑          ∑      |S| i∑
                                                                 Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] .                     (7.2)
                                    S∈S âS ∈AS               ∈S

Here, we extend the deviator’s decision space from a discrete to a continuous set. This relaxation does
not strengthen the deviator, since the objective is linear in µ, and the maximum is always attained at an
extreme point. Therefore, (7.1) is equivalent to the original definition in (MASE).
A natural idea is to apply no-regret learning algorithms simultaneously for the correlator and deviator.
However, directly updating the full distributions π and µ is infeasible, because the underlying spaces
are exponentially large.
Fortunately, Theorem 7.1 implies that maintaining the full distributions is unnecessary: it suffices to keep
track of a polynomial number of pure strategies, and use their convex combination as the approximate
equilibrium. This motivates our use of Follow the Perturbed Leader (FTPL) (Hazan et al., 2016), where each
decision at a timestep is a pure strategy, which can be represented compactly.
Let π (t) ∈ ∆A and µ(t) ∈ ∆×S∈S AS denote the decision variables at timestep t ≥ 1 for the correlator and
the deviator, respectively. The interaction between these two players can be described by the update rule
                                              t           D            E
                             π (t+1) ∈ argmin ∑ F π, µ(τ ) − ñ(t+1) , π
                                            π ∈ ∆ A τ =1
                                                            t           D           E                                (7.3)
                             µ ( t +1) ∈     argmax        ∑ F π (τ) , µ + m̃(t+1) , µ ,
                                           µ(t) ∈∆×S∈S AS τ =1

where ñ(t+1) and m̃(t+1) are noise vectors sampled independently at each timestep from some distri-
bution, which we will specify later. These noise terms play the role of regularizershin online mirrori
descent (OMD) (Hazan et al., 2016), ensuring stability in the updates by controlling E                 π ( t +1) − π ( t )
      h             i
and E µ(t+1) − µ(t) .

Since F (π, µ) is bilinear in (π, µ), both the minimization and maximization problems admit solutions at
vertices of their respective decision spaces. In other words, the argmin for the correlator and the argmax
for the deviator always contain at least one pure strategy.
In what follows, we will explain in detail how to update π efficiently under this framework. The update
of µ is deferred to Section G.


7.2   Efficient Update of π

The key step in updating π (t+1) is to select a pure strategy, i.e., a joint action a(t+1) ∈ A with π (t+1) (a(t+1) ) =
1, that minimizes the objective. To gain insight into this update rule, we first examine how to compute
argminπ ∈∆A F (π, µ) for a fixed µ.
Suppose we want to find a joint action ã ∈ A such that the pure strategy π̃ with π̃ (ã) = 1 minimizes
F (π̃, µ). Expanding the definition, we obtain
                            N
                                                     µ(S, âS )
                F (π̃, µ) = ∑      ∑           ∑                (Ui (âS , ã−S ) − Ui (ã))
                           i =1 S∈S : i ∈S âS ∈AS
                                                       |S|
                            N
                                                     µ(S, âS )                                   
                        =∑         ∑           ∑                 Ui âS∩N (i) , ãN (i)\S − Ui ãN (i) .
                           i =1 S∈S : i ∈S âS ∈AS
                                                       |S|


                                                                 11
          Utility Dependence Graph                                                       Tree Decomposition
                                   2                                                            𝑩𝑩𝟏𝟏 = {𝟏𝟏, 𝟑𝟑, 𝟒𝟒}
            1
                                                                                                1       3        4




      3
                                         4
                                                                           1      2        4                           3       5


                       5
                                                                          𝑩𝑩𝟐𝟐 = {𝟏𝟏, 𝟐𝟐, 𝟒𝟒}                         𝑩𝑩𝟑𝟑 = {𝟑𝟑, 𝟓𝟓}

            Figure 2: An illustration of a tree decomposition of the Utility Dependency Graph.


Therefore, for each candidate ã ∈ A, only the local actions ãN (i) matter for the expression above. If
we can evaluate this expression efficiently,9 then for each player i ∈ [ N ] we may search for ãN (i) that
minimizes it. However, a difficulty arises because N (i ) and N ( j) may overlap across different players.
Hence, we must ensure that the local assignments remain globally consistent.
To address this, we now introduce the concept of a tree decomposition and show how it enables us to
optimize F efficiently. Throughout the paper, we assume that a tree decomposition is given, and analyze
the complexity only with respect to this decomposition.


Tree decomposition. A tree decomposition T := B1 , B2 , . . . , BK of the Utility Dependency Graph
                                                       

G = (V , E ) is a tree with K nodes (bags), each Bk ⊆ V where V = [ N ], satisfying the following properties
(Diestel, 2025):
  1. kK=1 Bk = [ N ].
      S

  2. For every edge (i, j) ∈ E , there exists k with {i, j} ⊆ Bk .
  3. For any player i ∈ [ N ], if i appears in two bags B, B′ ∈ T , then every bag on the path from B to B′
     also contains i.
The treewidth of G is

                                               tw(G) := min max (| B| − 1) ,                                                            (7.4)
                                                             T    B∈T

that is, the minimum, over all tree decompositions, of the maximum bag size minus one. As illustrated
in Figure 2, the tree decomposition separates the game into overlapping bags. For example, since B2 and
B3 only overlap at B1 , then B2 and B3 can be optimized independently, with consistency later enforced
at B1 .
As illustrated in Figure 2, a tree decomposition separates the game into overlapping local components.
For example, if the subtrees rooted at B2 and B3 intersect only through B1 , then the assignments within
these two subtrees can be optimized independently once their shared actions on B1 are fixed; global
consistency is subsequently enforced through the overlaps between adjacent bags.
Since any clique in G is contained in some bag (Diestel, 2025), for every player i ∈ [ N ] there exists a bag
B with N (i ) ⊆ B. We arbitrarily assign each player i to such a bag.
  9 This is possible since µ is a linear combination of pure strategies when updated according to (7.3).




                                                                 12
Dynamic programming on the tree. We begin by choosing an arbitrary bag as the root of the tree
decomposition and denote it by Br . For each bag B ∈ T , let C ( B) denote the set of its children. With this
setup, we maintain a vector d(t+1) ∈ R×B∈T AB , defined as
                                 t
                                          1                                                                          
          d(t+1) ( B, aB ) = ∑ ∑                        ∑              ∑ µ(τ) (S, âS ) Ui (âS∩B , aB\S ) − Ui (aB )
                               τ =1 S∈S
                                        | S |          i ∈S :    âS ∈AS
                                                 i assigned to B
                                                                                                                               (7.5)
                               +       ∑         ′
                                                   min           d(t+1) ( B′ , a′B′ ) − n(t+1) ( B, aB ),
                                     B′ ∈C ( B) aB′ ∈A B′ :
                                               aB∩ B′ =a′B∩ B′


where n(t+1) ( B, aB ) ∼ Exp (η )10 is sampled from an exponential distribution. Therefore, in (7.3),
ñ(t+1) (a) = ∑ B∈T n(t+1) ( B, aB ). Since each i assigned to B satisfies N (i ) ⊆ B, the utility Ui (aB ) can
be written in terms of aB alone. Moreover, the summation ∑âS ∈AS can be computed efficiently, since
µ(τ ) is updated via (7.3) and is therefore a pure strategy.


Reconstructing the strategy.             The optimal joint action a(t+1) ∈ A is then reconstructed recursively from
the root Br to the leaves:
                                                   ( t +1)
                                                 a Br        = argmin d(t+1) ( Br , aBr )
                                                                 aBr ∈A Br
                                                  ( t +1)
                                                                                
                                                                                               ( t +1)
                                                                                                                              (7.6)
                           ∀ B ∈ C ( B r ),      a B \ Br =        argmin d(t+1) B, (aB\ Br , aB∩ Br ) .
                                                                 aB\ Br ∈A B\ Br

By Property 1 of Tree Decomposition, every player’s action will be included. Since argmina                                           is
                                                                                                                    B\ Br ∈A B\ Br

taken over A B\ B   r , no contradictions arise by Property 3 of Tree Decomposition. We then set π
                                                                                                   ( t +1) (a( t +1) ) =

1.
The regret bound of this procedure is summarized below.

Theorem 7.2. Consider (7.3). For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, the following holds:
                                                                                        r
             T                                   1 + (tw(G) + 1) log A                      1
       max ∑ F π , µ
                  (t) (t)
                            − F π̂, µ (t)
                                            ≤ 2 |T |                       + 2η |T | T + 2T log .
      π̂ ∈∆ t=1
           A                                                  η                                 δ

                                                                                              √
The√proof is given in Section F. Importantly, Theorem 7.2 shows that by setting η = 1/ T, we obtain
O( T ) regret. Since the update rule for µ mirrors that of π, the detailed analysis is deferred to Section G.
We now formally state the regret bound for µ in the following theorem.

Theorem 7.3. Consider the updates in (7.3). For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, the following
holds:
                                                                                        r
                T                               1 + (tw(G) + 1) log A                          1
       max
        ×   A
               ∑      (t)         (t) (t)
                   F π , µ̂ − F π , µ       ≤2 |T |
                                                              η
                                                                          + 2η |T | T + 2T log .
                                                                                                   δ
    µ̂∈∆ S∈S S t=1


The complete proof is provided in Section G.
 10 Pr( x ≥ w ) = exp(− ηw ) when x ∼ Exp ( η ).




                                                                         13
7.3   Computation of Equilibrium
                                    ′
For any δ′ > 0, by setting δ = δ2 in Theorem 7.2 and Theorem 7.3, and applying the union bound, we
obtain that with probability at least 1 − δ′ , the following holds:
                                             T                     T               
                                 max
                                 ×S∈S AS
                                         ∑ F π (t) , µ − π̂min
                                                           ∈∆A
                                                               ∑ F π̂, µ(t)
                             µ̂∈∆        t =1                       t =1
                                                                                 r                              (7.7)
                                   1 + (tw(G) + 1) log A                                    2
                           ≤4 |T |                       + 4η |T | T + 2             2T log ′ .
                                            η                                              δ
We now connect this bound to the convergence of the average strategy profile. Let π ∗ , µ∗ be the solution
to (7.1), and define the average strategies π := T1 ∑tT=1 π (t) and µ := T1 ∑tT=1 µ(t) . The left-hand side of
(7.7) corresponds to the duality gap: maxµ̂∈∆×S∈S AS F (π, µ̂) − minπ̂ ∈∆A F (π̂, µ). Since π ∗ , µ∗ are optimal
solutions to (7.7), they satisfy
                                 min F (π̂, µ) ≤ F (π ∗ , µ∗ ) ≤      max        F (π, µ̂).
                                π̂ ∈∆A                             µ̂∈∆×S∈S AS

Combining these pieces, we arrive at the following finite-time convergence guarantee:
Theorem 7.4. Let π ∗ , µ∗ be the solution of (7.1), and define π := T1 ∑tT=1 π (t) , µ := T1 ∑tT=1 µ(t) . Then, for
any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                                                            s
                                                     1 + ( tw (G) + 1 ) log A                 2 log 2δ
              max F (π, µ̂) ≤ F (π ∗ , µ∗ ) + 4 |T |                          + 4η |T | + 2            .
           µ̂∈∆×S∈S AS                                          ηT                               T

                                                                                    q       !
                                                                   |T |·tw(G) log A+ log 2δ
With η = √1 , the average strategy π constitutes an O                         √               -MASE. The overall run-
           T                                                                    T
                                       
ning time is O T · |S| · |T | · Atw(G)+1 . Hence, the exponential dependence aligns with the lower bound
in Theorem 6.3.
Remark 7.5 (Extension to Weighted Sum and Maximum over Coalition Gains). The correlator-deviator
framework in this section extends directly to other coalition objectives, including a weighted sum (or
weighted average) of deviation gains and the maximum deviation gain within a coalition. In particular,
we can optimize
                    min max max ∑ wS,i Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]                            (Weighted Sum)
                    π ∈∆A S∈S âS ∈AS i ∈S

                    min max max max Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] ,                                   (Maximum)
                    π ∈∆A S∈S âS ∈AS i ∈S

where w := {wS,i }S∈S , i∈S is an arbitrary collection of weights (e.g., ∑i∈S wS,i = 1 if one prefers a
weighted average for each coalition S). For (Weighted Sum), the algorithm and analysis are unchanged.
We focus on the uniform average solely for ease of exposition. For (Maximum), it suffices to augment the
deviator’s decision to also select the player whose gain is evaluated, i.e., replace µ(S, âS ) by µ(S, i, âS )
over triples (S, i, âS ) with i ∈ S. The resulting meta-game is then equivalent to (Maximum).


8     Experiments

In this section, we compare our algorithm against several baselines: Follow the Regularized Leader
with a Euclidean regularizer (FTRL), Hedge, Follow the Perturbed Leader with an exponential noise


                                                           14
distribution (FTPL; all players run FTPL independently), and Online Mirror Descent with a Euclidean
regularizer (OMD) (Hazan et al., 2016). We also plot the ground-truth MASE computed via linear
programming (LP) in Section A. Finally, to highlight the distinction between MASE and CCE, we also
plot the CCE that minimizes the coalition exploitability defined below (Optimal CCE).
We evaluate the algorithms on three criteria:
    • Exploitability. (maxi∈[ N ] maxâi ∈Ai Ea∼π [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)]): the maximum gain a single player
      can obtain by deviating unilaterally. Exploitability ≤ 0 indicate a Nash equilibrium (or a correlated
      equilibrium if π is correlated).
    • Coalition exploitability. (maxµ∈∆×S∈S AS F (π, µ)): the maximum average gain when a coalition
      deviates simultaneously. We take S to be the set of all non-empty player subsets.
    • Social welfare. (∑iN=1 Ea∼π [Ui (a)]): the sum of all players’ utilities.
Utility definitions and additional details are provided in Section H. In Prisoner’s Dilemma (Luce and
Raiffa, 1957), the MASE corresponds to players choosing (C, D ) and ( D, C ) with probability 0.5 each,
yielding a social welfare of 1.0. In contrast, because the unique NE/CCE in this game is ( D, D ), the
baselines converge to that outcome, with a lower social welfare of 0.4. Thus, in Prisoner’s Dilemma,
MASE promotes cooperation and achieves higher utility.
In the Stag Hunt, there are two Nash equilibria, one of which attains higher utility. As shown in Figure 3,
all baselines converge to the worse equilibrium, whereas MASE converges to the better one. Finally, in
terms of exploitability (unilateral deviations), MASE remains close to the baselines, while the baselines
are substantially more fragile to multilateral deviations.


8.1    Gap between Optimal CCE and Baseline Algorithms

In Figure 4, we compare the coalition exploitability achieved by the baseline algorithms, MASE, and the
optimal CCE, i.e., the CCE with the smallest coalition exploitability. The figure shows that the optimal
CCE remains close to MASE in terms of coalition exploitability, whereas none of the baseline algorithms
approaches it. Instead, the baseline methods exhibit substantially larger coalition exploitability than
MASE, highlighting the importance of explicitly accounting for multilateral deviations.


8.2    Coalition Exploitability in Larger Games

As shown in Figure 5, the coalition exploitability of the average strategy generated by classical no-regret
learning algorithms increases as the game size grows. Note that we only consider coalitions of size no
more than two. This trend underscores the importance of minimizing coalition exploitability. As games
become larger, the equilibria to which these algorithms converge become increasingly fragile to coalition
deviations, necessitating approaches that explicitly account for such multilateral deviations. Further
details are provided in Section I.


9     Application: Tradeoff between Exploitability and Social Welfare

In Figure 3, we see that allowing exploitability to increase from 0.0 to 0.1 raises the social welfare of
MASE from 0.4 to 1.0. This begs a classical equilibrium-selection question, finding an equilibrium that
maximizes social welfare (Conitzer and Sandholm, 2008; Papadimitriou and Roughgarden, 2008), and
its natural extension:



                                                       15
                                               Prisoner's Dilemma
                                                               0.4                                         1.2
                   0.3




                                             Coalition Expl.




                                                                                          Social Welfare
  Exploitability
                                                                                                           1.0
                   0.2                                         0.3
                                                                                                           0.8
                   0.1                                         0.2
                                                                                                           0.6
                   0.0                                         0.1                                         0.4
                         0      5000 10000                           0      5000 10000                           0      5000 10000
                             Timestep (t)                                Timestep (t)                                Timestep (t)
                                                                     Stag Hunt
                                                                                                          2.0
                                             Coalition Expl.




                                                                                         Social Welfare
                   0.4
  Exploitability




                                                               0.6
                   0.3                                                                                    1.5
                                                               0.4
                   0.2
                   0.1                                         0.2                                        1.0
                   0.0
                                                               0.0                                        0.5
                         0      5000 10000                           0      5000 10000                           0      5000 10000
                             Timestep (t)                                Timestep (t)                                Timestep (t)

                                   MASE                        FTRL             Hedge                      Optimal CCE
                                   FTPL                        OMD              LP                         Maximum

Figure 3: LP denotes the linear programming solution from Section A, and Maximum denotes the
maximum achievable social welfare. The baselines are comparatively fragile to multilateral deviations,
while MASE is more robust and achieves higher social welfare. At the same time, MASE’s exploitability
is close to that of the baselines.


            Given a tolerance ϵ ≥ 0, what is the optimal ϵ-approximate equilibrium that maximizes social
            welfare?

In other words, if we allow an equilibrium to be exploitable, i.e., we permit unilateral deviations to
improve a player’s expected utility by up to ϵ, how much additional social welfare can we obtain? We
formalize this welfare-robustness trade-off via the Exploitability Welfare Frontier (EWF) in the next section.


9.1           Exploitability Welfare Frontier (EWF)

We plot, in Figure 6, the maximum achievable social welfare as a function of the exploitability ϵ. We
refer to this curve as the Exploitability Welfare Frontier (EWF), defined below.

Definition 9.1 (Exploitability Welfare Frontier (EWF)). The exploitability welfare frontier for CCE, de-
noted EWFCCE (ϵ) : [0, 1] → [0, N ], is the maximum social welfare attainable among all ϵ-approximate



                                                                           16
                                                                        Coalition Exploitability




                                 Coalition Expl.
                                                   0.3
                                                                                                      0.3

                                                   0.2
                                                                                                      0.2

                                                   0.1
                                                                                                      0.1

                                                   0.0
                                                                                                      0.0

                                                         2       4          6               8                2    3           4              5
                                                              Number of Players (N)                              Action Size (A)


                                                             MASE             FTRL                     Hedge          Optimal CCE
                                                             FTPL             OMD                      LP


Figure 4: Coalition exploitability in random normal-form games with varying numbers of players and
                                                       1
action-set sizes, where S contains all possible coalitions (|S| = 2 N − 1). In each game, all players have the
same action-set size A, and each entry of the utility matrix is sampled independently and uniformly from
[0, 1], and then normalized so that the minimum and maximum entries are exactly 0 and 1, respectively.

                                                                         Coalition Exploitability

                                                                        0.4                                              0.4
                     0.4
   Coalition Expl.




                     0.3                                                0.3                                              0.3

                     0.2                                                0.2
                                                                                                                         0.2
                     0.1
                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                         0.1
                     0.0


                                  50                              100          2           3          4           5             1               2               3
                           Number of Players (N)                                          Action Size (A)                      Expected Interactions per Player (c)


                                                                        MASE                      FTRL           Hedge
                                                                        FTPL                      OMD


Figure 5: The coalition exploitability of random polymatrix games of different sizes when coalitions
                                                    1
with no more than two players are considered. A larger expected number of interactions per player (c)
generally corresponds to a larger treewidth of the Utility Dependency Graph.


CCEs. Formally,

                                                                                                       N
                                                                  EWFCCE (ϵ) := max
                                                                                       π ∈ϵ-CCE
                                                                                                ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (a)] .                                                 (9.1)
                                                                                                      i =1

where
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                        A
                                         ϵ-CCE :=                 π ∈ ∆ : max max Ea∼π [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)] ≤ ϵ .                                          (9.2)
                                                                              i ∈[ N ] âi ∈Ai


Analogously, one can define EWFNE and EWFCE for Nash and correlated equilibria, respectively.


                                                                                                 17
Prior work has investigated related welfare–approximation              EWFCCE across Games
trade-offs for NE (e.g., in congestion games                                       2.0



(Christodoulou et al., 2011) and two-player                                        1.8




                                                                       Social Welfare
                                                                                   1.6
normal-form games (Czumaj et al., 2015)). How-                                     1.4

ever, computational barriers limit what is achiev-                                 1.2


able. Czumaj et al. (2015)’s algorithm relies on                                   1.0


an efficient oracle for computing approximate                                      0.8
                                                                                                                    Prisoner’s Dilemma
                                                                                                                    Stag Hunt
NE, yet computing NE is PPAD-hard (Chen and                                        0.6
                                                                                                                    Chicken Game
                                                                                   0.4                              Pigou’s Network

Deng, 2006; Daskalakis et al., 2009). Moreover,                                          0.0     0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8            1.0

                                                                            Exploitability
Deligkas et al. (2016) shows that finding the
welfare-maximizing approximate NE can require                                  1


superpolynomial time even in two-player normal-           Figure 6: EWFCCE over four different games.
form games. Hence, to ensure computational
tractability, we leave these extensions out of scope and focus on EWFCCE throughout.
We establish basic structural properties of EWFCCE in the following lemmas.
Lemma 9.2. In any game, EWFCCE is non-decreasing, concave, and piecewise linear as a function of ϵ.

Lemma 9.3. The slope of the EWFCCE can be as small as zero and is unbounded above.

The proof is deferred to Section J. By Lemma 9.2, the EWFCCE is concave. Hence, its slope is non-
increasing in ϵ wherever it is differentiable. The same concavity argument also yields the following
lower bound on the price of stability (Nisan et al., 2007) of ϵ-CCE.
Corollary 9.4. For any finite game with positive optimal social welfare and any ϵ ∈ [0, 1], the price of
stability of ϵ-CCE satisfies

                                    maxπ ∈ϵ-CCE ∑iN=1 Ea∼π [Ui (a)]
                                                                                          ≥ ϵ.
                                     maxπ ∈∆A ∑iN=1 Ea∼π [Ui (a)]

Corollary 9.4 follows directly from the concavity of the EWF function.


9.2   Finding a Pareto Optimal Strategy

A natural next question is: given a tolerance ϵ ≥ 0 on exploitability, how do we compute a strategy that
maximizes social welfare among all ϵ-approximate CCEs? We show that this can be computed efficiently
using a variant of our MASE framework. Specifically, we solve the following weighted objective:
                                               wS
                         argmin max max              ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] ,
                                  S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                                                                                                                         (9.3)
                          π ∈∆A

where w ∈ RS is a vector of non-negative weights. We have the following lemma.
Lemma 9.5. For any ϵ > 0, computing the CCE with exploitability no more than ϵ that maximizes social
welfare is equivalent to (9.3) by setting S = {{i }}i∈[ N ] ∪ {[ N ]} and using the weights:
                                                 (
                                                     w          if |S| = 1
                                          wS =
                                                     1−w        if S = [ N ]

for some w ∈ [0, 1). Conversely, solving (9.3) with these parameters corresponds to finding a point on
the Pareto frontier of social welfare and exploitability.


                                                           18
The proof is postponed to Section J. In Figure 7, we plot the exploitability and social welfare of the
strategy induced by varying w. For the Stag Hunt, because one of the Nash equilibria already attains
maximal social welfare, the social welfare remains fixed at its optimal value for all w ∈ [0, 1).

                                       Trade-off between Exploitability and Social Welfare

                        0.4                                                                                0.05                                  2.1




                                                                   Social Welfare




                                                                                                                                                       Social Welfare
       Exploitability




                                                                                         Exploitability
                                                             1.0
                        0.2                                                                                0.00                                  2.0

                                                             0.5
                        0.0                                                                               −0.05                                  1.9
                           0.0            0.5            1.0                                                   0.0            0.5            1.0
                          Weight on Individual Rationality (w)                                                Weight on Individual Rationality (w)
                                  Prisoner’s Dilemma                                                                       Stag Hunt

Figure 7: The trade-off between exploitability and social welfare in Prisoner’s Dilemma and the Stag
Hunt.                                             1

With Lemma 9.5, we can compute EWFCCE by solving (9.3) for different values of w. This also yields
an efficient algorithm (fixed-parameter tractable in the treewidth of the Utility Dependency Graph, as in
Section 7) for computing the socially optimal approximate CCE.
Fix a target tolerance ϵ > 0, We can recover an optimal ϵ-approximate CCE as follows. By Lemma 9.5,
each choice of w ∈ [0, 1) induces a point on the EWFCCE , with the resulting solution attaining some
exploitability level ϵ′ . Moreover, ϵ′ decreases monotonically as w increases. This monotone correspon-
dence suggests a simple approach: perform a binary search over w to find the optimal strategy whose
exploitability does not exceed the target ϵ. The details are given in Algorithm 1.

 Algorithm 1: Binary Search
   Input: The exploitability tolerance ϵ and the floating-point tolerance EPS.
   Output: EWFCCE (ϵ).
 1 l ← 0, r ← 1.
 2 while r − l > EPS do
 3    w ← l +2 r
 4    Solve (9.3) associated with w.
 5    Compute the exploitability ϵ′ and the social welfare sw of the resulting strategy.
 6    if ϵ′ ≤ ϵ then
 7         swfinal ← sw
 8         r←w
 9    else
10         l←w
11    end
12 end
   Return: swfinal .

Despite the tractability of our approach when Utility Dependency Graph has a bounded treewidth,
computing the EWFCCE is intractable in general succinct games: even evaluating the value at ϵ = 0 (i.e.,
maximum welfare over exact CCEs) is NP-hard in a number of standard succinct game classes.


                                                                                    19
Lemma 9.6. Computing EWFCCE (0) is NP-hard in each of the following succinct games:

  1. Bounded-degree, bipartite graphical games.

  2. Polymatrix games.

  3. Hypergraphical games.

  4. Congestion games.

  5. Local effect games.

  6. Facility location games.

  7. Network design games.

  8. Scheduling games.

The proof is postponed to Section J. Still, it may be possible to evaluate EWFCCE (ϵ) efficiently when ϵ
is sufficiently large. For example, Tsaknakis and Spirakis (2007) gave a polynomial-time algorithm for
computing an ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium (with exploitability at most ϵ) for ϵ ≥ 0.3393, whereas
computing approximate Nash equilibria in general is PPAD-hard (Chen and Deng, 2006; Daskalakis
et al., 2009). This suggests that, for large enough ϵ, computing EWFCCE (ϵ) may be computationally
tractable.


10    Conclusion

In this work, we introduced the Minimum Average-Strong Equilibrium (MASE), a tractable solution
concept that accounts for multilateral deviations by minimizing each coalition’s average incentive to de-
viate. We established that computing an approximate MASE is NP-hard even with singleton coalitions
and proved a lower bound showing unavoidable exponential dependence on the treewidth of the Utility
Dependency Graph. Complementing these hardness results, we design an algorithm that combines a
correlator-deviator meta-game with FTPL updates and dynamic programming over a tree decomposi-
tion. Its exponential dependence on the treewidth matches the lower bound. We also showed how this
framework can be used to compute the exploitability welfare frontier (EWF). Empirically, MASE is sub-
stantially more robust to coalition deviations than standard baselines, while improving social welfare in
canonical games and often incurring little to no increase in unilateral exploitability. Finally, we showed
that minimizing the minimum deviation gain within each coalition, i.e., computing a minimum strong
CCE, is also NP-hard, even when the joint action space is polynomial in the number of players. This
further motivates our focus on minimizing average coalitional gain.


References

Naman Agarwal, Alon Gonen, and Elad Hazan. Learning in non-convex games with an optimization
 oracle. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2019.

Ioannis Anagnostides, Gabriele Farina, Ioannis Panageas, and Tuomas Sandholm. Optimistic mirror
  descent either converges to Nash or to strong coarse correlated equilibria in bimatrix games. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.



                                                   20
Ioannis Anagnostides, Gabriele Farina, Tuomas Sandholm, and Brian Hu Zhang. A polynomial-time
  algorithm for variational inequalities under the Minty condition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03432, 2025.

Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational complexity: a modern approach. Cambridge University Press,
  2009.

Robert Aumann. Acceptable points in General Cooperative n-person Games, pages 287–324. Princeton Uni-
  versity Press, 01 1959. doi: 10.1090/fic/023/01.

Robert J Aumann. Subjectivity and correlation in randomized strategies. Journal of mathematical Economics,
  1(1):67–96, 1974.

Carl T Bergstrom and Peter Godfrey-Smith. On the evolution of behavioral heterogeneity in individuals
  and populations. Biology and Philosophy, 13(2):205–231, 1998.

B Douglas Bernheim, Bezalel Peleg, and Michael D Whinston. Coalition-proof Nash equilibria I. con-
  cepts. Journal of economic theory, 42(1):1–12, 1987.

Marie Louisa Tølbøll Berthelsen and Kristoffer Arnsfelt Hansen. On the computational complexity of
 decision problems about multi-player Nash equilibria. Theory of Computing Systems, 66(3):519–545,
 2022.

Christian Borgs, Jennifer Chayes, Nicole Immorlica, Adam Tauman Kalai, Vahab Mirrokni, and Christos
 Papadimitriou. The myth of the folk theorem. Games and Economic Behavior, 70(1):34–43, 2010.

Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Gábor Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge university press, 2006.

Xi Chen and Xiaotie Deng. Settling the complexity of two-player Nash equilibrium. In Symposium on
  Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2006.

George Christodoulou, Elias Koutsoupias, and Paul G Spirakis. On the performance of approximate
 equilibria in congestion games. Algorithmica, 61(1):116–140, 2011.

Vincent Conitzer and Tuomas Sandholm. New complexity results about Nash equilibria. Games and
  Economic Behavior, 63(2):621–641, 2008.

Artur Czumaj, Michail Fasoulakis, and Marcin Jurdzinski. Approximate Nash equilibria with near
  optimal social welfare. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2015.

Constantinos Daskalakis, Paul W Goldberg, and Christos H Papadimitriou. The complexity of comput-
  ing a Nash equilibrium. Communications of the ACM, 52(2):89–97, 2009.

Argyrios Deligkas, John Fearnley, and Rahul Savani. Inapproximability results for approximate Nash
  equilibria. In International Conference on Web and Internet Economics (WINE), 2016.

Reinhard Diestel. Graph theory, volume 173. Springer Nature, 2025.

B Curtis Eaves. Polymatrix games with joint constraints. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 24(3):
  418–423, 1973.

Barış Can Esmer, Jacob Focke, Dániel Marx, and Paweł Rza˛żewski. Fundamental problems on bounded-
  treewidth graphs: The real source of hardness. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and
  Programming (ICALP), 2024.

Nicola Gatti, Marco Rocco, and Tuomas Sandholm. On the verification and computation of strong Nash
  equilibrium. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS), 2013.


                                                   21
Sergiu Hart and David Schmeidler. Existence of correlated equilibria. Mathematics of Operations Research,
  14(1):18–25, 1989.

Elad Hazan et al. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends® in Optimization, 2
  (3-4):157–325, 2016.

Martin Hoefer. Strategic cooperation in cost sharing games. International Journal of Game Theory, 42(1):
 29–53, 2013.

Ron Holzman and Nissan Law-Yone. Strong equilibrium in congestion games. Games and economic
  behavior, 21(1-2):85–101, 1997.

Joseph T Howson Jr. Equilibria of polymatrix games. Management Science, 18(5-part-1):312–318, 1972.

Russell Impagliazzo and Ramamohan Paturi. On the complexity of k-SAT. Journal of Computer and System
  Sciences, 62(2):367–375, 2001.

Sham Kakade, Michael Kearns, John Langford, and Luis Ortiz. Correlated equilibria in graphical games.
  In ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 2003.

Yasushi Kawase and Hanna Sumita. On the max-min fair stochastic allocation of indivisible goods. In
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2020.

Michael J. Kearns, Michael L. Littman, and Satinder Singh. Graphical models for game theory. In
 Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2001.

Daniel Lokshtanov, Dániel Marx, and Saket Saurabh. Known algorithms on graphs of bounded treewidth
 are probably optimal. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2011.

Duncan R.. Luce and Howard Raiffa. Games and Decisions. wiley, 1957.

Hervé Moulin and J-P Vial. Strategically zero-sum games: the class of games whose completely mixed
 equilibria cannot be improved upon. International Journal of Game Theory, 7(3-4):201–221, 1978.

John F Nash. Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 36(1):
  48–49, 1950.

Rabia Nessah and Guoqiang Tian. On the existence of strong Nash equilibria. Journal of Mathematical
  Analysis and Applications, 414(2):871–885, 2014.

Noam Nisan, Tim Roughgarden, Eva Tardos, and Vijay V Vazirani. Algorithmic game theory. Cambridge
 university press, 2007.

Christos H Papadimitriou and Tim Roughgarden. Computing correlated equilibria in multi-player
 games. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 55(3):1–29, 2008.

Arthur Pigou. The economics of welfare. Routledge, 2017.

Mona Rahn and Guido Schäfer. Efficient equilibria in polymatrix coordination games. In International
 Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS), 2015.

Robert W Rosenthal. A class of games possessing pure-strategy Nash equilibria. International Journal of
  Game Theory, 2(1):65–67, 1973.

Ola Rozenfeld and Moshe Tennenholtz. Strong and correlated strong equilibria in monotone congestion
  games. In International Workshop on Internet and Network Economics, pages 74–86. Springer, 2006.



                                                   22
Arun Sai Suggala and Praneeth Netrapalli. Online non-convex learning: Following the perturbed leader
  is optimal. In Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), 2020.

Haralampos Tsaknakis and Paul G Spirakis. An optimization approach for approximate Nash equilibria.
 In International workshop on web and internet economics. Springer, 2007.

F.J.C. van Megen, G. Facchini, P.E.M. Borm, and S.H. Tijs. Strong Nash equilibria and the potential
   maimizer. Center discussion paper, Operations Research, 1996.

Heinrich Von Stackelberg. Market structure and equilibrium. Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.




                                                  23
A       Linear Programming for Solving (MASE)

(MASE) can be solved by the following linear programming

                          min w
                           π,w
                                  1
                                 |S| i∑
                          w≥             Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]   ∀S ∈ S , âS ∈ AS
                                      ∈S
                          π (a) ≥ 0 ∀a ∈ A
                           ∑ π (a) = 1.
                          a∈A

Since

                                    Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S )] = ∑ π (a)Ui (âS , a−S )
                                                             a∈A
                                    Ea∼π [Ui (a)] = ∑ π (a)Ui (a)
                                                      a∈A

are linear in π, the linear programming above is valid. Note that the linear program contains exponen-
tially many variables (π ∈ ∆A ), so its complexity is necessarily exponential in N.


B       Omitted Proofs in Section 5

Lemma 5.1 (Non-existence of Coalition-Proof CCE). Coalition-proof CCE may not exist, even in a three-
player normal-form game.

Proof. We construct a counterexample using a variant of the game described by Bernheim et al. (1987).
Consider three players dividing five coins. Each player i chooses an action from the set of all possible
strict rankings over the players, Ai = {( P1 ≻ P2 ≻ P3 ), . . . , ( P3 ≻ P2 ≻ P1 )}. If two or more players
vote for the same ranking, the payoffs are distributed according to that ranking: the first-ranked player
receives 3 coins, the second-ranked player receives 2 coins, and the third-ranked player receives 0. If no
majority agreement is reached (i.e., all three players vote for distinct rankings), all players receive 0.
Let π ∗ be any CCE of this game. By definition, any coalition-proof CCE must also be a CCE. We prove the
non-existence of a coalition-proof CCE by demonstrating that any valid CCE π ∗ admits a self-enforcing
deviation by a coalition.
Assume without loss of generality that the expected utilities of players 1, 2, and 3 are non-increasing:

                                 Ea∼π ∗ [U1 (a)] ≥ Ea∼π ∗ [U2 (a)] ≥ Ea∼π ∗ [U3 (a)] .

Consider the coalition S = {2, 3} and a deviation strategy where both members deterministically vote
for the ranking P2 ≻ P3 ≻ P1 . Under this deviation, players 2 and 3 form a majority regardless of player
1’s action, guaranteeing themselves payoffs of 3 and 2, respectively. This deviation is both valid and
self-enforcing:

    1. Improvement: The total sum of utilities in any outcome is at most 5. Given the non-increasing or-
       der of utilities, it must hold that player 2’s original expected utility is strictly less than 3 (Ea∼π ∗ [U2 (a)] <
       3) and player 3’s is strictly less than 2 (Ea∼π ∗ [U3 (a)] < 2). Thus, the deviation strictly improves
       the payoff for both coalition members.


                                                            24
    2. Self-Enforcement: The deviation constitutes a coalition-proof CCE in the reduced game restricted
       to coalition S. Player 2 has no incentive to deviate further, as player 2 already achieves the max-
       imum possible utility of 3 coins. Player 3 also has no incentive to deviate. Any further deviation
       by Player 3 breaks the agreement with Player 2; thus, Player 3 can only accrue positive utility by
       matching Player 1’s strategy, π1∗ . However, if coordinating with π1∗ were to yield a utility strictly
       greater than 2, Player 3 would have had a profitable unilateral deviation from the original equilib-
       rium π ∗ . This contradicts the assumption that π ∗ is a CCE.

Since there exists a valid, self-enforcing deviation for the coalition {2, 3}, π ∗ cannot be a coalition-proof
CCE. As this holds for any CCE π ∗ , no coalition-proof CCE exists in this game.


C     Omitted Proofs in Section 6

This section presents the omitted proofs in Section 6.


C.1     Proof of Theorem 6.1

Theorem 6.1. Computing ϵ-MASE is NP-hard, even when S only contains singletons (coalitions of size
one) and 1/ϵ is polynomial in the number of players.

Proof. We will introduce the allocation problem (NP-hard) and show that it can be reduced to computing
the correlated strong equilibrium.
Definition C.1 (Allocation Problem). There are n agents and m goods. An assignment X : [m] → [n] is
a mapping from each good to an agent. Agent i’s utility is ui ( X ) for an assignment X. A stochastic
                   [n]
allocation p ∈ ∆[m] is a distribution over all possible assignments. The egalitarian social welfare (ESW)
maximization is defined as

                                           max min
                                                    [n] i ∈[ n ]
                                                                     ∑         p ( X ) u i ( X ).       (C.1)
                                       p∈ ∆ [ m ]                  X ∈[m][n]


For any allocation problem, we can create a game with N = n + m players. The action set of player
i ≤ n is Ai = {0, 1}, while the action set of player j > n is A j = [n]. For any joint action a ∈ A,
Ui (a) = ui (a−[n] ) for i ≤ n when a1 = a2 = · · · = an , otherwise Ui (a) = −ui (a−[n] ). For j > n,
U j (a) = 0. Moreover, let S = {{1} , {2} , . . . , {n}}. We further define
                                                                              
                                  a :=           ∑        π ( a ) u i   a −[n]
                                                 a∈A :
                                           a2 = a3 =···= an =0
                                                                                   
                                    b :=             ∑                π (a)ui a−[n]
                                                 a∈A :
                                           a2 = a3 =···= an =1
                                                                                      
                                    c := −                 ∑              π (a)ui a−[n] .
                                                    a∈A :
                                              ∃i,j∈[n]\{1},ai ̸= a j

Then, the gap of player 1 is lower bounded by

              max Ea∼π [Ui ( â1 , a−1 ) − Ui (a)] ≥ max ( a, b) + c − ( a + b + c) = − min ( a, b) .
             â1 ∈{0,1}



                                                                     25
The equation holds when a1 is always equal to a2 when a2 = a3 = · · · = an . Therefore, the optimal
strategy π should satisfy π[n] ((0, . . . 0)) = π[n] ((1, . . . 1)) = 12 .
Then, (MASE) is equivalent to

               min          max ∑ −π (a)ui (a−[n] ) =         min          max            ∑           −π−[n] (a−[n] )ui (a−[n] ),
                         [n] i ∈[n ]                                   [n] i ∈[ n ]
            π[m] ∈∆[m]                 a∈A                π[m] ∈∆[m]                  a−[n] ∈[m][n]

which is equivalent to (C.1). Finally, according to Kawase and Sumita (2020, Corollary 1), it is NP-hard
to approximate (C.1) up to 1 − 1e .
The hard instance constructed in Kawase and Sumita (2020) satisfies that maxi maxX ∈[m][n] ui ( X ) =
Poly(n, m) and the solution to (C.1) is 1. Therefore, Poly( N, 1ϵ ) algorithm does not exist unless P=NP for
solving an ϵ-MASE.


C.2     Proof of Theorem 6.3

Theorem 6.3 (Treewidth). Suppose a tree decomposition of the Utility Dependency Graph is given.
Under the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) (Impagliazzo and Paturi, 2001),11 (MASE) cannot
be computed in O ∗ (( A − ζ )tw(G) ) for any ζ > 0. Moreover, under the additional assumption that
BPP=P,12 9N1                                              ∗         tw(G) ) for any ζ > 0.
             2 -approximate MASE cannot be computed in O (( A − ζ )



Proof. According to Lokshtanov et al. (2011), under SETH, q-coloring cannot be solved in O((q − ζ )tw ·
Poly(| I |)) for arbitrary graph G, when a tree decomposition of width tw is given.13 In the sequel,
we construct a game such that computing N1 -approximate (MASE) is equivalent to determining the
q-coloring.
For any q-coloring problem on G = (V, E), we will construct a game with N = |V | + | E| players.
For each player i ≤ |V |, the action set Ai = {1, 2, . . . , q} and the utility function Ui ≡ 0 is a con-
stant function equal
                   to zero. For each
                                        player j > |V |, the action set is {1} and the utility func-
tion is U j (a) = 1 ae j−|V |,1 ̸= ae j−|V |,2 , where (e j−|V |,1 , e j−|V |,2 ) is the ( j − |V |)th edge in E and 1 is
the indicator
                function (equals one when the argument is true and otherwise zero). In this game,
S = {i1 , i2 , j + |V |} | e j = (i1 , i2 ) .
Firstly, for any proper coloring c ∈ [q]|V | , the associated pure strategy is π c , where πic ( ai ) = 1 if and only
if ai = ci and 0 otherwise. It satisfies (MASE). Because for any S ∋ S = (i1 , i2 , j + |V |), the maximum of
 1
          U (π ) is 13 , which is attained when the colors of node i1 , i2 are different. Therefore, π c obtains
|S| ∑i ∈S i
the maximum for every coalition S ∈ S , which implies the satisfaction of (MASE).
Secondly, for any joint strategy π ∈ ∆A satisfying (MASE), we have

            ∑i ∈S Ui ( π )    1      ∑i ∈S Ui ( π )            1      ∑ U (a)
                             |S| S∑
      min                  ≤                        = ∑ π (a)      ∑ i∈S|S|i
      S∈S        |S|              ∈S
                                          | S |      a∈A
                                                              |S| S∈S
                                                     1   1                                               
                                                    ≤ −       ∑
                                                     3 3| E| a∈A
                                                                  π (a) 1 a[|V |] is not a proper coloring .

   11 SETH assumes that SAT cannot be solved in O ∗ ((2 − ζ )n ) for any ζ > 0, where n is the number of variables in the SAT

instance.
   12 This assumption implies that any problem with a polynomial-time randomized algorithm also has a polynomial-time deter-

ministic algorithm.
   13 As summarized in Esmer et al. (2024), the proof of the q-coloring complexity implicitly implies that the complexity is lower

bounded by O(qtw · Poly(| I |)), even though a tree decomposition of width tw is given. In other words, aside from computing a
tree decomposition, the q-coloring itself has an intrinsic computational barrier.


                                                               26
Because there must exist at least one edge with both of its nodes in the same color for any improper
coloring. On the other hand, let π̂ = π c for some proper coloring c. Then, for any S ∈ S , we have

                                                         ∑i∈S Ui (π̂ )  1
                                                                       = .
                                                             |S|        3

Therefore, the approximation error of (MASE) is at least

                                    1                                                     
                                   3| E| a∑
                                             π ( a ) 1   a [|V |] is not a proper coloring
                                          ∈A

                                       1                                 2
for any joint strategy π. When we get 9N 2 approximation, since | E | ≤ N , we have

                                                                                          1
                                   ∑ π (a) 1 a[|V |] is not a proper coloring ≤ 3 .
                                 a∈A

Therefore, when sampling a ∼ π, we will get a proper coloring with probability at least 23 , which is
in complexity class RP. As a result, when P=RP, the time complexity of computing (MASE) is at least
O∗ ( Atw(G) ), where G is the trust graph and A is the size of the maximal action set.


C.3    Proof of Theorem 6.4

Theorem 6.4. Approximating

             min max max min Ea∼π,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]                             (Minimum Strong CCE)
             π ∈∆A S∈S π̂S ∈∆AS i ∈S


within an additive error of N12 is NP-hard, even for a small game in which the joint action set size |A| is
polynomial in the number of players N and the treewidth of the Utility Dependency Graph is two.

Proof. The proof is inspired by Borgs et al. (2010, Theorem 1), who showed that approximating

                                        min       min       max Ea∼(π1 ,π2 ,π3 ) [U3 (a)]
                                       π1 ∈ ∆ A1 π2 ∈ ∆ A2 π3 ∈ ∆ A3

is NP-hard via a reduction from 3-colorability.
We similarly reduce 3-colorability to the problem of finding an approximate (Minimum Strong CCE).
Given any graph G = (V, E) with |V | ≥ 4, we construct a game with N = 3|V | + 2 players and S = {S},
where S = {1, 2, . . . , 3|V |, 3|V | + 2}. Thus, there is only a single coalition of interest. The objective of
strong CCE is therefore

                             min      max min Ea∼π,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                             π ∈∆A π̂S ∈∆AS     i ∈S

                      (i )
                      ⇔ min           max       min ∑ αi Ea∼π,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                             π ∈∆A π̂S ∈∆AS α∈∆S i ∈S
                      (ii)
                      ⇔ min min               max
                             π ∈∆A α∈∆S π̂S ∈∆AS i ∈S
                                                       ∑ αi Ea∼π,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] .            (C.2)


(i) holds because

                                        ∑ αi Ea∼π,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                                       i ∈S



                                                                   27
is linear in α, so the minimum is attained at an extreme point. In other words, α places all of its mass
on a single player in S. (ii ) follows from the minimax theorem.
Intuitively, we construct the game so that π, α, and π̂S correspond to the strategies of three different
agents. Agent 1 and agent 2 each choose a vertex in V together with a color in [3]. Agent 3 then chooses
either agent 1 or agent 2 and tries to predict the vertex selected by that agent. We will show that, under
the utility functions defined below, the value of (C.2) differs depending on whether G is 3-colorable.
Consequently, if we can approximate this value with sufficient accuracy, then we can decide whether G
is 3-colorable.
The action sets of the game are defined by
                                                       
                                                       3|V |
                                                                     i = 3|V | + 1
                                                  A i = 2|V |         i = 3|V | + 2
                                                       
                                                         1            i ≤ 3|V |,
                                                       

for all i ∈ [ N ]. Hence, every joint action can be written as ((v1 , c1 ), (v3 , i3 )), where v1 , v3 ∈ V, c1 ∈ [3],
and i3 ∈ [2]. Thus, agent 1 proposes a vertex v1 together with a color c1 , while agent 3 predicts that
player i3 proposed vertex v3 . In addition, for each player i ≤ 3|V |, we encode its index as (v2 , c2 ) with
v2 ∈ V and c2 ∈ [3]. This represents the proposal of agent 2. For any joint action ((v1 , c1 ), (v3 , i3 )), the
utility functions are defined by
                             U3|V |+1 (((v1 , c1 ), (v3 , i3 ))) = U3|V |+2 (((v1 , c1 ), (v3 , i3 ))) = 1
                                                                     
                                                                     1 v1 = v2 , c1 ̸ = c2
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     1 (v , v ) ∈ E, c = c
                                                                     
                                                                            1 2             1        2
                             U(v2 ,c2 ) (((v1 , c1 ), (v3 , i3 ))) =
                                                                     1 v i = v3
                                                                     
                                                                          3
                                                                     
                                                                     0 Otherwise.

In words, a player receives a reward 1 whenever the proposals of agents 1 and 2 are inconsistent, or
whenever agent 3 makes a correct prediction. Hence, in the corresponding Utility Dependency Graph,
the edge set is
                                                3|V |                      3|V |
                    E = {(i, 3|V | + 1)}i=1 ∪ {(i, 3|V | + 2)}i=1 ∪ {(3|V | + 1, 3|V | + 2)} .
In other words, every one of the first 3|V | vertices is adjacent to both 3|V | + 1 and 3|V | + 2, and these
latter two vertices are also adjacent. Hence, the resulting graph has treewidth 2.
Now fix any joint action ((v1 , c1 ), (v3 , i3 )). We can factor
                              π (((v1 , c1 ), (v3 , i3 ))) = π−S ((v1 , c1 )) πS ((v3 , i3 ) | (v1 , c1 )),
and only the second factor πS ((v3 , i3 ) | (v1 , c1 )) affects the term Ui (a) in (C.2). Since π is maximizing
Ui (a), we may always choose
                                      πS ((v3 , i3 ) | (v1 , c1 )) = 1 (v1 = v3 and i3 = 1) .
Therefore, for every i ≤ 3|V |, we have Ui (a) = 1 in (C.2). For i > 3|V |, we also have Ui (a) = 1
by definition of the utility functions. Thus, Ui (a) is constant in (C.2) and can be removed from the
optimization objective. We may therefore rewrite the objective as
                                min       min      max     ∑ αi Ea−S ∼π−S ,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S )]
                             π−S ∈∆A−S α∈∆S π̂S ∈∆AS i ∈S
                                                              3|V |
                      (i )
                      ⇔         min         min         max    ∑ αi Ea−S ∼π−S ,âS ∼π̂S [Ui (âS , a−S )] .    (C.3)
                             π−S ∈∆A−S α∈∆[3|V |] π̂S ∈∆AS i =1



                                                                  28
(i) holds because Ui (a) = 1 for every a ∈ A whenever i > 3|V |. Hence, we may assume without loss of
generality that α(3|V | + 2) = 0, since U j (a) ≤ Ui (a) = 1 for any a ∈ A, i > 3|V |, and j ≤ 3|V |.
We now analyze (C.3). First, it is always at least |V1 | , because π̂S (agent 3) can choose i3 = 1 and select a
vertex v3 ∈ V uniformly at random. Then,
                                                              !
                                                   3                                       3
                                                                                1                                1
             Pr                (v1 = v3 ) = ∑ ∑ π−S ((v, c1 )) π̂S ((v, 1)) =        ∑    ∑   π−S ((v, c1 )) =       .
  (v1 ,c1 )∼π−S ,(v3 ,i3 )∼π̂S              v ∈V c =1
                                                                              | V | v ∈V c =1
                                                                                                               | V |
                                                               1                                                         1


If G is 3-colorable, then (C.3) is exactly |V1 | : agent 1, represented by π−S , and agent 2, represented by α,
both choose a uniformly random vertex and then assign to that vertex the color given by the same valid
3-coloring. Under this choice, the proposals of agents 1 and 2 are always consistent. Therefore, the only
way for a utility term to equal 1 is for agent 3 to predict the chosen vertex correctly, which occurs with
probability exactly |V1 | .
In contrast, suppose that G is not 3-colorable. If either agent 1 or agent 2 assigns probability at least
 1
|V |
     + 3|V1 |2 to some vertex, then (C.3) is at least |V1 | + 3|V1 |2 by letting agent 3 guessing that vertex deter-
ministically.
It remains to consider the case in which both agent 1 and agent 2 assign a probability at most |V1 | + 3|V1 |2
to every vertex. Then, for any v1 ∈ V,
                                       3                                                                   
                                                                                               1     1                2
                                      ∑ πS ((v1 , c1 )) ≥ 1 − (|V | − 1)                          +
                                                                                              |V | 3|V |2
                                                                                                                ≥
                                                                                                                    3|V |
                                                                                                                          ,
                                      c1 =1

and similarly,
                                                                    3
                                                                                               2
                                                                   ∑ α((v2 , c2 )) ≥ 3|V | .
                                                                   c2 =1

Using the shorthand
                                                                                 3
                                                            π−S (v1 ) = ∑ π−S ((v1 , c1 ))
                                                                              c1 =1

for the marginal distribution on vertices, and similarly for α, we obtain

                                 Pr            (v1 = v2 , c1 ̸= c2 or (v1 , v2 ) ∈ E, c1 = c2 )
                 (v1 ,c1 )∼π−S ,(v2 ,c2 )∼α

           =       ∑         π1 ( v1 ) α ( v2 )                 Pr
                                                  c1 ∼π−S (· | v1 ),c2 ∼α(· | v2 )
                                                                                     (v1 = v2 , c1 ̸= c2 or (v1 , v2 ) ∈ E, c1 = c2 )
                 v1 ,v2 ∈V
                   4
                 9|V |2 v ,v∑∈V c1 ∼π−S (· | v1 ),c2 ∼α(· | v2 )
           ≥                                 Pr                  (v1 = v2 , c1 ̸= c2 or (v1 , v2 ) ∈ E, c1 = c2 | v1 , v2 )
                             1   2

          (i )4
          ≥        .
            9|V |2
(i) holds because

                      ∑                       Pr                   (v1 = v2 , c1 ̸= c2 or (v1 , v2 ) ∈ E, c1 = c2 | v1 , v2 )
                   v1 ,v2 ∈V c1 ∼π−S (· | v1 ),c2 ∼α(· | v2 )

can be interpreted as the expected number of violations over all pairs of coloring plans. Since G is not
3-colorable, any two coloring plans must contain at least one violation: either they assign different colors


                                                                                 29
to the same vertex, or they assign the same color to two adjacent vertices. Hence, every pair of coloring
plans has at least one inconsistency, and therefore, this expectation is at least one.
Finally, let agent 3 guess agent 1’s proposed vertex uniformly at random. Then (C.3) is at least
                                                                            (i )
                    4            4           1       1       4            1            1       1
                        2
                          + 1−       2
                                       .         =       +       2
                                                                     1−         ≥          +        .
                  9|V |        9|V |       | V |   | V |   9|V |        | V |        | V |   3|V |2

(i) holds whenever |V | ≥ 4. Therefore, if we can approximate (Minimum Strong CCE) within N12 < 3|V1 |2 ,
then we can decide whether G is 3-colorable.


D     Proof of Theorem 7.1

Theorem 7.1 (Efficient Representation). For any ϵ ≥ 0, at least one of the ϵ-MASE can be represented
as a linear combination of ∑S∈S |S| · Atw(G) + 1 pure strategies, where tw(G) is the treewidth of Utility
Dependency Graph.

Proof. Let D := ∑S∈S ∑i∈S AS∩N (i) . For any joint strategy π ∈ ∆A , consider the vector v π ∈ RD , where
                                                   h                                      i
                       vπ (S, i, âS∩N (i) ) = Ea∼π Ui (âS∩N (i) , a−(S∩N (i)) ) − Ui (a) ,

for any S ∈ S and âS∩N (i) ∈ AS∩N (i) . By definition of v π , it is linear in π. Therefore, the vertex set of
  v | π ∈ ∆A should correspond to a subset of ∆A ’s vertex set, which is the set of all pure strategies.
 π

                                                                   ∗
By Carathéodory’s theorem, for any π ∗ ∈ ∆A , v π can be represented as the linear combination of
D + 1 vertices, which further implies it can be written as a linear combination of D + 1 vectors in
                                                ∗            k
{v π | π is a pure strategy}. Then, when v π = ∑kD=+11 λk v π with λ ∈ ∆ D+1 and π 1 , π 2 , . . . are pure
strategies, due to the linearity of v π , we have

                                                   D +1                 D +1
                                              ∗
                                            v π = ∑ λ k v π = v ∑ k =1 λ π .
                                                                   k           k   k

                                                   k =1

Finally,

                                        1
                         max max             ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                         S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S

                                       1            h                                  i
                       = max max           ∑
                         S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                                Ea∼π Ui âS∩N (i) , a−(S∩N (i)) − Ui (a)

                                       1          ∗
                       = max max           ∑
                         S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                                vπ (S, i, âS∩N (i) )

                                        1          D +1
                                             ∑ v∑k=1 λ π (S, i, âS∩N (i) ).
                                                          k   k
                       = max max
                         S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S


Hence, once π ∗ satisfies (MASE), there exists a linear combination of D + 1 pure strategies also satisfying
(MASE). Given N (i ) ≤ tw(G), we have D ≤ ∑S∈S |S| · Atw(G) .




                                                                  30
E     The Optimality of Dynamic Programming on Tree Decomposition

This section shows that the dynamic programming (e.g., (7.5)) will compute the optimality. Let ui (aN (i) )
be the contribution of player i’s utility to the final objective. Recall that NiS := N (i ) ∩ S. Then, in (7.5),

                              t
                                    1                                                                              
          u i (aN ( i ) ) = − ∑ ∑
                                   |S| i∑               ∑           µ(τ ) S, âN S   Ui âN S , aN (i)\S − Ui (aN (i) )
                                                                                        i                   i
                          τ =1 S∈S      ∈S â             ∈AN S
                                                     NS
                                                      i       i


at timestep t. We consider the following update rule in this section, which generalizes (7.5) and (G.1)
(see the proof of Lemma F.3 and Lemma G.1),

                       h( B, aB ) =             ∑          u i (aN ( i ) ) +         ∑              max
                                                                                                a′B′ ∈A B′ :
                                                                                                                 h( B′ , a′B′ ).   (E.1)
                                           i ∈[ N ] :                             B′ ∈C ( B)
                                       i assigned to B                                         aB∩ B′ =a′B∩ B′


In the following, we will show that (E.1) is optimal.

Lemma E.1. For any bag B ∈ T , let st( B) := {i }i assigned to B ∪ B′ ∈C( B) st( B′ ) be the set of players
                                                                                                        S

assigned to B and bags in its subtree. Then, for any bag B ∈ T and aB ∈ A B , we have

                                           h( B, aB ) =           max
                                                              a− B ∈A− B
                                                                                  ∑ u i (aN ( i ) ).                               (E.2)
                                                                                i ∈st( B)


The proof is postponed to the end of this section. Note that for the root bag Br , since st( Br ) = [ N ],
Lemma E.1 implies that maxaBr ∈ABr h( Br , aBr ) = maxa∈A ∑iN=1 ui (aN (i) ). Therefore, we find the maxi-
mum of ∑iN=1 ui (aN (i) ), and the optimal joint action a ∈ A can be extracted recursively.
Specifically, let

                                                   a∗Br = argmax h( Br , aBr )
                                                             aBr ∈A Br
                                                                
                                                                               ( t +1)
                                                                                                                                  (E.3)
                              ∀ B ∈ C ( Br ), a∗B\ Br = argmax d B, (aB\ Br , aB∩ Br ) .
                                                                  aB\ Br ∈A B\ Br

We will do this recursively until we find the whole a∗ ∈ A. The tie-breaking rule can be arbitrary, and
we use the lexicographic order of joint actions for simplicity. Hence, we prove the optimality of the
update rule (E.1).

Lemma E.1. For any bag B ∈ T , let st( B) := {i }i assigned to B ∪ B′ ∈C( B) st( B′ ) be the set of players
                                                                                                        S

assigned to B and bags in its subtree. Then, for any bag B ∈ T and aB ∈ A B , we have

                                           h( B, aB ) =           max
                                                              a− B ∈A− B
                                                                                  ∑ u i (aN ( i ) ).                               (E.2)
                                                                                i ∈st( B)


Proof. For leaf bags B (C ( B) = ∅), for any joint action aB ∈ A B , we have

                                                                                                 (i )
               h( B, aB ) =        ∑            u i (aN ( i ) ) =     ∑ ui (aN (i) ) = a−max
                                                                                         B ∈A− B
                                                                                                 ∑ u i (aN ( i ) ).
                                  i ∈[ N ] :                        i ∈st( B)                                      i ∈st( B)
                              i assigned to B

(i) is because N (i ) ⊆ B for any i assigned to B by definition. Additionally, since B is a leaf bag,
st( B) = {i ∈ B : i assigned to B}.


                                                                        31
Then, for any bag B with all of its children B′ ∈ C ( B) satisfying (E.2), we have

                    h( B, aB ) =              ∑           u i (aN ( i ) ) +      ∑              max
                                                                                            a′B′ ∈A B′ :
                                                                                                             h( B′ , a′B′ )
                                            i ∈[ N ] :                        B′ ∈C ( B)
                                        i assigned to B                                    aB∩ B′ =a′B∩ B′
                                 (i )
                                 =            ∑           u i (aN ( i ) ) +      ∑        ′
                                                                                                max
                                                                                                        ′
                                                                                                                max             ∑     ui (a′N (i) )
                                            i ∈[ N ] :                        B′ ∈C ( B) aB′ ∈A B′ : a− B′ ∈A− B′ i ∈st( B′ )
                                        i assigned to B                                 aB∩ B′ =a′B∩ B′

                                 =            ∑           u i (aN ( i ) ) +      ∑              max
                                                                                           a′ ∈A :
                                                                                                               ∑       ui (a′N (i) ).
                                            i ∈[ N ] :                        B′ ∈C ( B)                 i ∈st( B′ )
                                                                                         aB∩ B′ =a′B∩ B′
                                        i assigned to B

(i) uses the induction hypothesis. By Property 3 of Tree Decomposition, for any B′ ∈ C ( B) and i ∈
st( B′ ), N (i ) ∩ ( B \ B′ ) = ∅. Because for any i ∈ st( B′ ), there must be a bag B′′ in the subtree of B′
such that N (i ) ⊆ B′′ , and Property 3 of Tree Decomposition will be violated if N (i ) ∩ B \ B′ ̸= ∅.
Then, modifying the constraint aB∩ B′ = a′B∩ B′ to aB = a′B will not change the value of ui (a′N (i) ) for any
i ∈ st( B′ ). Hence,

                              h( B, aB ) =                ∑            u i (aN ( i ) ) +      ∑        max
                                                                                                        ′
                                                                                                                  ∑         ui (a′N (i) ).
                                                      i ∈[ N ] :                           B′ ∈C ( B) a ∈A :′ i ∈st( B′ )
                                                                                                      a B =a B
                                                  i assigned to B

Furthermore, by Property 3 of Tree Decomposition, for any B′ , B′′ ∈ C ( B) and i′ ∈ st( B′ ), i′′ ∈ st( B′′ ),
we have N (i′ ) ∩ N (i′′ ) ⊆ B. Finally,

                          h( B, aB ) =              ∑           ui (aN (i) ) + max                 ∑          ∑
                                                                                    a′ ∈A : B′ ∈C ( B) i ∈st( B′ )
                                                                                                                     ui (a′N (i) )
                                                  i ∈[ N ] :
                                                                                    aB =a′B
                                              i assigned to B
                                                                                                                                            

                                                                       ∑                                  ∑          ∑         ui (a′N (i) )
                                                                                                                                           
                                          =     max                              u i (aN ( i ) ) +
                                              a− B ∈A− B                                                                                   
                                                                   i ∈[ N ] :                         B′ ∈C ( B) i ∈st( B′ )
                                                               i assigned to B

                                          =     max
                                              a− B ∈A− B
                                                              ∑ u i (aN ( i ) ).
                                                           i ∈st( B)

This completes the induction.


F      Proof of Theorem 7.2

Theorem 7.2. Consider (7.3). For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, the following holds:
                                                                                         r
              T                                   1 + (tw(G) + 1) log A                     1
       max ∑ F π , µ
                   (t) (t)
                             − F π̂, µ (t)
                                             ≤ 2 |T |                       + 2η |T | T + 2T log .
      π̂ ∈∆A t=1                                               η                                δ

Proof. The proof of Theorem 7.2 can be decomposed into three steps.
Firstly, we show that without loss of generality, if FTPL with a fixed noise ñ for all timesteps t = 1, 2, . . .
attains sublinear regret when the adversary is oblivious,14 then FTPL with independent noise vectors ñ(t)
also attains the same regret confronting an adaptive adversary. The reduction to the oblivious setting is
  14 An oblivious adversary will choose all the utility functions at timestep 0, while an adaptive adversary will choose the utility

functions at timestep t according to π (1) , π (2) , . . . , π (t−1) .


                                                                                   32
common in the literature (Agarwal et al., 2019; Suggala and Netrapalli, 2020), and we include it here for
completeness.
                                                                                                      
                                                                                        ( t +1)
Secondly, we will show that the regret of a fictitious algorithm π (t+1) ∈ argminπ ∈∆A ∑τ =1 F π, µ(τ ) +
D            E
  ñ(t+1) , π is sublinear.

Finally, we will show that the regret of (7.3) and that of the fictitious algorithm are close.


F.1    Fixed Noise Vector

In this section, for completeness, we will show a reduction from an adaptive adversary to an oblivious
adversary. For ease of representation, we will take correlator (π) as the no-regret learner, and the deviator
(µ) as the adversary.
An adaptive adversary determines the utility function at timestep t, which is µ(t) in this section, ac-
cording to our past strategies, π (1) , . . . , π (t−1) . In contrast, an oblivious adversary determines all utility
functions, i.e., µ(1) , . . . , µ(T ) , at the beginning (timestep 0), such that µ(t) is irrelevant to π (1) , . . . , π (t−1) .
In the following, we will show that a sublinear regret against an oblivious adversary implies a sublinear
regret against an adaptive adversary.
Intuitively, when the random noise ñ(1) , . . . , ñ(T ) are independent, π (t) only depends on µ(1) , . . . , µ(t−1) ,
which is known to both the oblivious and adaptive adversary, due to the update rule (7.3). Hence, an
additional observation on π (1) , . . . , π (t−1) does not make adversary more powerful. Formally, we have
the following lemma (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006, Lemma 4.1).
Lemma F.1 (Reformulation of Lemma 4.1 in Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi (2006)). Consider any randomized
no-regret learner and the distribution of the decision variable π (t) is fully determined by µ(1) , . . . , µ(t−1) .
Assume the no-regret learner’s regret against any sequence of µ(1) , . . . , µ(T ) generated by an oblivious
adversary satisfies that
                                          "                                    #
                                               T                          
                         Eñ(1) ,...,ñ(T) max ∑ F π (t) , µ(t) − F π̂, µ(t)     ≤ R.
                                                π̂ ∈∆A t=1
                              |                              {z                          }
                                                      Expected Regret

Then, for any sequence of µ(1) , . . . , µ(T ) generated by an adaptive adversary and δ > 0, with probability
at least 1 − δ, we have
                                                                            r
                                 T                                             1
                         max ∑ F π , µ       (t) (t)
                                                       − F π̂, µ (t)
                                                                       ≤ R + 2T log .
                        π̂ ∈∆A t=1                                                 δ

It is easy to see that the distribution of π (t) generated by (7.3), whose randomness is induced by ñ(t) , is
fully determined by µ(1) , . . . , µ(t−1) , given ñ(t) is generated by a fixed distribution independently at each
timestep.
Then, we will show that the expected regret of FTPL using independent noise vectors and FTPL with a
fixed noise vector is the same, while facing an oblivious adversary.
                                       "               #
                                         T               T                  h              i
                      Eñ(1) ,...,ñ(T) ∑ F π , µ
                                             (t) (t)
                                                         = ∑ Eñ(1) ,...,ñ(T) F π (t) , µ(t)
                                         t =1                          t =1

                                                                  (i ) T
                                                                            h             i
                                                                  = ∑ Eñ(t) F π (t) , µ(t) .
                                                                       t =1



                                                                  33
(i) uses the fact that both π (t) and µ(t) are independent
                                                  h        of i ñ(1) , . . . , ñ(t−1) , when the adversary controlling
                                                      (
µ is oblivious. Finally, the expectation Eñ(1) F π , µ t ) ( t )     of

                                                      t           D          E
                                     π (t+1) ∈ argmin ∑ F π, µ(τ ) − ñ(1) , π
                                                 π ∈ ∆ A τ =1
                  h             i
is equal to Eñ(t) F π (t) , µ(t) , when n(t) and n(1) are sampled from an identical distribution. In
summary,

                    fixed noise and an oblivious adversary (Expectation)
                 ⇒independent noise and an oblivious adversary (Expectation)
                 ⇒independent noise and an adaptive adversary (High Probability Bound).

Hence, the problem reduces to proving sublinear regret against an oblivious adversary with a fixed noise
vector for all timesteps.


F.2    Low Regret with Accurate Prediction

The discussion above suggests that we only need to show the sublinear regret against an oblivious
adversary, when all timesteps share the same noise vector. In other words, we consider the following
update rule,
                                                       t          
                                      π (t+1) ∈ argmin ∑ F π, µ(τ ) − ⟨ñ, π ⟩ ,                                     (F.1)
                                                   π ∈ ∆ A τ =1

where ñ, ñ(1) , . . . , ñ(T ) are identically distributed.
Next, we will show that if the regret minimizer can make the decision π (t+1) with an accurate prediction
of µ(t+1) , then we can achieve sublinear regret. In particular, the decision variable at timestep t + 1 is
chosen according to (F.2).

                                                       t +1       
                                      π (t+1) ∈ argmin ∑ F π, µ(τ ) − ⟨ñ, π ⟩ .                                     (F.2)
                                                   π ∈ ∆ A τ =1

Actually, we can see that (F.2) is exactly the original update rule of π (t+2) . Therefore, we will prove the
following lemma in the sequel.

Lemma F.2. Consider (F.2). For any timestep t = 1, 2, . . . , µ(1) , µ(2) , . . . , and any π̂ ∈ ∆A , we have
                                t                                    D                E
                               ∑  F  π ( τ +1) ( τ )
                                              , µ      − F   π̂, µ (τ )
                                                                          ≤  ñ, π (2)
                                                                                       − π̂   .                      (F.3)
                              τ =1


Proof. We will prove the lemma by induction. When t = 1, we have
                                           
                  F π (2) , µ(1) − F π̂, µ(1)
                                 D         E                   D               E
                = F π (2) , µ(1) − ñ, π (2) − F π̂, µ(1) − ⟨ñ, π̂ ⟩ + ñ, π (2) − π̂
                   (i ) D          E
                   ≤ ñ, π (2) − π̂ .


                                                                34
                                           
(i) is because π (2) ∈ argminπ ∈∆A F π, µ(1) − ⟨ñ, π ⟩.

Next, we will show that when (F.3) holds for t = t0 , then it also holds for t = t0 + 1. For any π̂ ∈ ∆A , we
have
                       t0 +1                                  
                       ∑         F π (τ +1) , µ(τ ) − F π̂, µ(τ )
                       τ =1
                                                                                                          !
                       t0 +1                                      t0 +1                  
                 = ∑ F π              ( τ +1)
                                                ,µ   (τ )
                                                                −   ∑ F π̂, µ        (τ )
                                                                                                − ⟨ñ, π̂ ⟩ − ⟨ñ, π̂ ⟩
                       τ =1                                         τ =1
                                                                                                                          !
                ( i ) t0 +1                                       t0 +1                              D            E
                 ≤ ∑ F π ( τ +1) , µ ( τ ) −                        ∑ F π (t0 +2) , µ(τ) − ñ, π (t0 +2)                      − ⟨ñ, π̂ ⟩
                       τ =1                                         τ =1
                   t0                                     D                 E
                 = ∑ F π (τ +1) , µ(τ ) − F π (t0 +2) , µ(τ ) + ñ, π (t0 +2) − π̂ .
                       τ =1
                                                         
(i) is because π (t0 +2) ∈ argminπ ∈∆A ∑τt0=+11 F π, µ(τ ) − ⟨ñ, π ⟩. Next, by setting π̂ = π (t0 +2) in the
induction hypothesis, we have
                                 t0
                                                                           D                     E
                               ∑  F  π ( τ +1) ( τ )
                                              , µ      − F   π ( t0 +2) ( τ )
                                                                       , µ      +  ñ, π ( t0 +2)
                                                                                                  − π̂
                               τ =1
                           D                     E D                   E
                          ≤ ñ, π (2) − π (t0 +2) + ñ, π (t0 +2) − π̂
                           D              E
                          = ñ, π (2) − π̂ .


F.3     Sublinear Variation

In this section, we will show that the regret of FTPL with/without a prediction of µ(t+1) is close. For-
mally, for any π̂ ∈ ∆A , we have

                   T                            
                  ∑  F  π (t) (t)
                             , µ    − F   π̂, µ (t)
                 t =1
                   T 
                                             T                               
              = ∑ F π (t+1) , µ(t) − F π̂, µ(t) + ∑ F π (t) , µ(t) − F π (t+1) , µ(t)
                 t =1                                                                t =1
              (i ) D                  E        T
                                                                  
              ≤ ñ, π (2) − π̂ + ∑ F π (t) , µ(t) − F π (t+1) , µ(t) .
                                                t =1

(i) uses Lemma F.2.
Moreover, since Ui (a) ∈ [0, 1] for any i ∈ [ N ] and a ∈ A, we have

                                                                    max         | F (π, µ)| ≤ 1.
                                                                  π ∈∆A ,
                                                                µ∈∆×S∈S AS

Then,
                                h                              i                   
                               E F π (t) , µ(t) − F π (t+1) , µ(t) ≤ Pr π (t) ̸= π (t+1) .
                                                                                                    ñ



                                                                                35
                                                      
Hence, we only need to lower bound Prñ π (t) = π (t+1) in the sequel. Recall that π (t) is a pure strategy
              
with π (t) a(t) = 1 for some joint action a(t) ∈ A. For any bag B ∈ T , let f a( B) denote its father
( f a( B) = ∅ if B is the root). Then,
                                                          
                      Pr π (t) = π (t+1) = Pr a(t) = a(t+1)
                      ñ                       ñ
                                          (i )
                                                                                               
                                                      (t)       ( t +1)     (t)         ( t +1)
                                          = ∏ Pr aB\ f a( B) = aB\ f a( B) a f a( B) = a f a( B) .
                                                        ñ
                                                  B∈T
                                                                      (t)
According to (7.6), each bag B ∈ T only determines aB\ f a( B) . Since n(t) ( B, ·) is sampled independently
                                          (t)     (t)
for every bag B, it follows that aB′ \ B , aB′′ \ B are independent for B′ , B′′ ∈ C ( B) with B′ ̸= B′′ , by Prop-
erty 3 of Tree Decomposition. Hence, (i ) holds.
                                                                                      
                                              (t)          ( t +1)  (t)        ( t +1)
For any B ∈ T , to lower bound Prñ aB\ f a( B) = aB\ f a( B) a f a( B) = a f a( B) , we will first get its lower
                                                 (t)
bound while further conditioning on aB∪ f a( B) ’s value and n( B, ·)’s value.
                                                         
            (t)           ( t +1)     (t)         ( t +1)
Then, Prñ aB\ f a( B) = aB\ f a( B) a f a( B) = a f a( B) is equal to this conditioned probability integrating over
                             (t)
all possible values of aB∪ f a( B) and n( B, ·). Formally, we want to lower bound
                                       
             (t)                          ( t +1)                        (t)        ( t +1)      (t)
           p B (a′B∪ f a( B) , x) := Pr aB\ f a( B) = a′B\ f a( B) a f a( B) = a f a( B) , aB∪ f a( B) = a′B∪ f a( B) ,
                                                                                n             o
                                         and ∀aB\ f a( B) ∈ A B\ f a( B) \ a′B\ f a( B) ,
                                                                                                                  
                                         n( B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) )) = x ((a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) ))

for any a′B∪ f a( B) ∈ A B∪ f a( B) and x ∈ RAB . Then,
                                                                  
                       (t)            ( t +1)  (t)         ( t +1)                                          (t)
                 Pr aB\ f a( B) = aB\ f a( B) a f a( B) = a f a( B) ≥                  inf                 p B (a′B∪ f a( B) , x),
                   ñ                                                       a′B∪ f a( B) ∈A B∪ f a( B) ,
                                                                                    x ∈RA B
                                                              
                (t)            ( t +1)      (t)        ( t +1)                   (t)
since Prñ aB\ f a( B) = aB\ f a( B) a f a( B) = a f a( B) is equal to p B (a′B∪ f a( B) , x) integrating over a′B∪ f a( B)
and x.
                                                                       n             o
       (t)
Since aB\ f a( B) = a′B\ f a( B) , for any aB\ f a( B) ∈ A B\ f a( B) \ a′B\ f a( B) , we have
                                                                                          
                                        d(t) B, a′B ≤ d(t) B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) ) .
                                                    

This can be equivalently written as
                                                                                     
                 n B, a′B ≥ d(t) B, a′B + n B, a′B − d(t) B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) ) .
                                       

         ( t +1)
Then, aB\ f a( B) = a′B\ f a( B) is equivalent to
                                                                                                    
                n B, a′B ≥ d(t+1) B, a′B + n B, a′B − d(t+1) B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) )
                                             
                                                                                                                                     (F.4)
                                                                                               
                            = d(t) B, a′B + n B, a′B − d(t) B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) )
                                           
                                                                                                             
                               + d(t) B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) ) − d(t+1) B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) )
                                                                    
                               + d(t+1) B, a′B − d(t) B, a′B .
                                                



                                                                 36
for any aB\ f a( B) ∈ A B\ f a( B) . In Lemma F.3, we show that the variation of d is bounded by 1. Therefore,
                                                                                       
                   n B, a′B ≥ d(t) B, a′B + n B, a′B − d(t) B, (a′B∩ f a( B) , aB\ f a( B) ) + 2
                                              

implies (F.4).
Lemma F.3. Consider the update rule (7.3). For any timestep t = 1, 2, . . . , T, bag B ∈ T , joint action
aB ∈ A B , and noise ñ ∈ R×B∈T AB , we have

                                                            d(t+1) ( B, aB ) − d(t) ( B, aB ) ≤ 1.

The proof is postponed to the end of this section. Let
                                                                                                          
                                          (t)      ′            ′        (t)          ′
                                                     
        w=            max n         o   d     B, a B   + n B, a B    − d       B, ( a           , a
                                                                                      B∩ f a( B) B\ f a( B) )   .
                 aB\ f a( B) ∈A B\ f a( B) \ a′B\ f a( B)

Note that w only depends on µ(1) , . . . , µ(t−1) and x. Then,
                        (t)
                      p B (a′B∪ f a( B) , x) ≥ Pr n B, a′B ≥ w + 2 | n B, a′B ≥ w
                                                                                

                                                                           Pr (n ( B, a′B ) ≥ w + 2)
                                                                      =
                                                                            Pr n B, a′B ≥ w
                                                                                                

                                                                      (i ) exp (− η ( w + 2))
                                                                      =
                                                                                 exp (−ηw)
                                                                      = exp (−2η ) .
(i) is because n ( B, a′B ) ∼ Exp(η ). Finally, by union bound,
                                                                                
                                                                (t)
                              Pr π (t) = π (t+1) ≥1 − ∑ 1 − p B (a′B∪ f a( B) , x)
                                       ñ
                                                                                          B∈T
                                                                                ≥1 − ∑ (1 − exp (−2η ))
                                                                                          B∈T
                                                                                ≥1 − ∑ 2η
                                                                                          B∈T
                                                                                =1 − 2η |T | .
Therefore,
                                      "                                                              #
                                           T                                                  
                                  E       ∑F π            (t)
                                                                ,µ   (t)
                                                                               − F π̂, µ   (t)
                                          t =1
                                      hD                         Ei          T  h                                         i
                              ≤E            ñ, π (2) − π̂                 + ∑ E F π ( t ) , µ ( t ) − F π ( t +1) , µ ( t )
                                                                               t =1
                                      hD                         Ei
                                                    (2)
                              ≤E            ñ, π         − π̂             + 2η |T | T.

Since exp( x ) ≥ 1 + x for any x ∈ R, (1 − exp (−2η |T |)) ≤ 2η |T |. Additionally,
                            hD                        Ei (i) h                                               i
                        E        ñ, π (2) − π̂          ≤ E ∥ñ∥∞ · π (2) − π̂                                  ≤2E [∥ñ∥∞ ]
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                 ≤2 ∑ max n( B, aB )
                                                                                                                        B∈T aB ∈A B
                                                                                                                 (i )       1 + log |A B |
                                                                                                                 ≤2 ∑                      .
                                                                                                                        B∈T
                                                                                                                                  η


                                                                                          37
(i) is by Hölder’s Inequality. (ii) is because the expectation of the maximum of n i.i.d. random variable
                                                 1+log n
sampled from Exp(η ) is upper bounded by            η    (Agarwal et al., 2019). Furthermore, log |A B | ≤
| B| · log A ≤ (tw(G) + 1) log A. Hence,
                  "                               #
                      T                                  1 + (tw(G) + 1) log A
                E ∑ F π (t) , µ(t) − F π̂, µ(t)     ≤ 2 |T |                       + 2η |T | T.
                    t =1
                                                                      η




F.4     Proof of Auxiliary Lemmas

Lemma F.3. Consider the update rule (7.3). For any timestep t = 1, 2, . . . , T, bag B ∈ T , joint action
aB ∈ A B , and noise ñ ∈ R×B∈T AB , we have

                                                           d(t+1) ( B, aB ) − d(t) ( B, aB ) ≤ 1.

Proof. Recall Lemma E.1. We can add |T | players as the noise player, each assigned to a bag in T , with
ui (aB ) = n( B, aB ) so that N (i ) = B. Recall that ui is the contribution of player i to the objective function
F. Then, by Lemma E.1, for any B ∈ T and aB ∈ A B , we have
                                                                                                            (t)
                                                 d(t) ( B, aB ) =             min
                                                                          a− B ∈A− B
                                                                                              ∑ u i (aN ( i ) ),
                                                                                            i ∈st( B)

where
                             t
       (t)                                   1                                                                      
      u i (aN ( i ) ) = − ∑        ∑                   ∑              µ(τ ) S, âN S   Ui âN S , aN (i)\S − Ui (aN (i) ) for i ∈ [ N ]
                            τ =1 S∈S :
                                            |S| â         ∈AN S
                                                                                        i                         i
                                  i ∈S               NS
                                                      i           i
       (t)
      ui (aN (i) ) = n( B, aN (i) ) for i as the noise player assigned to bag B.

                                                                (t)                    ( t +1)
For any noise player, we can see that ui (aN (i) ) − ui                                          (aN (i) ) = 0. For any i ∈ [ N ],

                             (t)                     ( t +1)
                           u i (aN ( i ) ) − u i                (aN ( i ) )

                                     1                                                                         
                    =        ∑      |S| â       ∑             µ(t+1) S, âN S   Ui âN S , aN (i)\S − Ui (aN (i) )
                                                                                   i                        i
                           S∈S :             NS
                                                  ∈AN S
                            i ∈S              i            i

                                    1                                                          
                    ≤ ∑                       ∑                µ(t+1) S, âN S Ui âN S , aN (i)\S − Ui (aN (i) )
                           S∈S :
                                   |S| â        ∈AN S
                                                                               i                        i
                            i ∈S            NS
                                             i         i
                    (i )            1                                        
                    ≤ ∑                       ∑                µ(t+1) S, âN S .
                           S∈S :
                                   |S| â        ∈AN S
                                                                               i
                            i ∈S            NS
                                             i         i


(i) is because Ui (aN (i) ) ∈ [0, 1] for any aN (i) ∈ AN (i) .




                                                                                   38
                                               (t)                                                     (t)
Recall that by definition, a− B = argmaxa−B ∈A−B ∑i∈st( B) ui (aN (i) ). Then,

       d(t) ( B, aB )
                                     
                  (t)      (t)
      = ∑ ui (aN (i)∩ B , aN (i)\ B )
          i ∈st( B)
                                                               
                       (t)                           ( t +1)
      ≥     ∑ ui                 (aN (i)∩ B , aN (i)\ B )
          i ∈st( B)
                                                                                                                             
                       ( t +1)                      ( t +1)       ( t +1)                 ( t +1)       (t)             ( t +1)
      =     ∑         ui              (aN (i)∩ B , aN (i)\ B ) + ui         (aN (i)∩ B , aN (i)\ B ) − ui (aN (i)∩ B , aN (i)\ B )
          i ∈st( B)
                                                                                                                                          
                       ( t +1)
                                      
                                                           ( t +1)
                                                                                         1                                           
      ≥     ∑  ui                        (aN (i)∩ B , aN (i)\ B ) − ∑                             ∑                 µ(t+1) S, âN S 
                                                                                                                                     
          i ∈st( B)                                                             S∈S :
                                                                                         |S| â        ∈AN S
                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                 i ∈S             NS
                                                                                                   i             i

                                            1                                                        
      =d(t+1) ( B, aB ) − ∑
                                           |S| i∈S∑                         ∑         µ(t+1) S, âN S
                                                                                                             i
                                       S∈S        ∩st( B) â            NS
                                                                             ∈AN S
                                                                         i        i

      ≥d(t+1) ( B, aB ) − 1.
Similarly, we can get the upper bound that d(t) ( B, aB ) ≤ d(t+1) ( B, aB ) + 1. Hence, the proof is completed.




G      Efficient Update of µ

This section provides the omitted details regarding the update procedure for µ and presents the complete
proof of Theorem 7.3.


G.1       Efficient Update of µ

The procedure for updating µ closely parallels that of π. Specifically, we iterate over all coalitions
S ∈ S and, for each S, determine the optimal action aS ∈ AS . To achieve this, we maintain a dynamic
programming vector gS ∈ R×B∈T AB for each S ∈ S , which is updated according to

                            ( t +1)                    1 t                                                                                          
                                                      |S| τ∑                ∑           ∑ π (τ) (a) Ui âB∩S , aB\S − Ui (aB )
                           gS         ( B, âB ) =
                                                           =1            i ∈S :    a∈A
                                                                   i assigned to B

                                                       +       ∑        ′
                                                                             max         g(t+1) ( B′ , â′B′ ) + m(t+1) ( B, âB ).
                                                           B′ ∈C ( B) âB′ ∈A B′ :
                                                                     âB∩ B′ =â′B∩ B′

At first sight, the ∑a∈A appears computationally prohibitive, since A is exponentially large. Fortunately,
the update becomes tractable once we recall that π (τ ) is always a pure strategy for τ ≥ 1. Denote by a(τ )
the joint action selected by π (τ ) . Then (G.0) simplifies to

                                   ( t +1)                      1 t                               
                                                                                                             (τ )
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                       (τ )
                                                                                                                            
                                                               |S| τ∑            ∑
                                 gS          ( B, âB ) =                                        Ui âB∩S , aB\S − Ui aB
                                                                    =1         i ∈S :
                                                                         i assigned to B
                                                                                                                                                           (G.1)
                                                                                                                               ( t +1)
                                                               +      ∑         ′
                                                                                      max        g(t+1) ( B′ , â′B′ ) + mS              ( B, âB ).
                                                                   B′ ∈C ( B) âB′ ∈A B′ :
                                                                             âB∩ B′ =â′B∩ B′


                                                                                         39
After completing the dynamic programming updates, we focus on the root bag Br of the tree decom-
                                                                                             ( t +1)
position. The selected coalition is then S(t+1) = argmaxS∈S maxâBr ∈ABr gS                            ( Br , âBr ). Next, we apply
                                                        ( t +1)
the reconstruction procedure in (7.6) on g (t+1) to extract a joint action â(t+1) ∈ A. Finally, we update
                                        S
µ(t+1) S(t+1) , â(t+1) = 1.

This procedure ensures that µ can be updated efficiently while maintaining consistency with the tree
decomposition structure. Analogous to the update of π, the regret of this process can be bounded.


G.2     Proof of Theorem 7.3

Theorem 7.3. Consider the updates in (7.3). For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, the following
holds:
                                                                                        r
                T                               1 + (tw(G) + 1) log A                          1
       max
        ×   A
               ∑      (t)         (t) (t)
                   F π , µ̂ − F π , µ       ≤2 |T |
                                                              η
                                                                          + 2η |T | T + 2T log .
                                                                                                   δ
    µ̂∈∆ S∈S S t=1


Proof. The proof of Theorem 7.3 is similar to that of Theorem 7.2. By using a similar argument as the
proof of Theorem 7.2, for any µ̂ ∈ ∆×S∈S AS , we have
                              T                              
                              ∑  F  π (t)
                                          , µ̂   − F   π (t) (t)
                                                            , µ
                             t =1
                            D             E  T                              
                           ≤ m̃, µ̂ − µ(2) + ∑ F π (t) , µ(t+1) − F π (t) , µ(t) .
                                                        t =1

Next, by introducing the counterpart of Lemma F.3 in the following, the rest of the proof follows that of
Theorem 7.2.
Lemma G.1. Consider the update rule (7.3). For any timestep t = 1, 2, . . . , T, bag B ∈ T , joint action
âB ∈ A B , coalition S ∈ S , and noise m̃ ∈ R×B∈T AB , we have
                                              ( t +1)                      (t)
                                             gS         ( B, âB ) − gS ( B, âB ) ≤ 1.

                                                      (t) (t)
The proof is postponed to the          section. Let S , â denote the coalition and action the deviator
                             end of this
picks at timestep t, i.e., µ(t) S(t) , â(t) = 1. Then,
                 h                                        i
               E F π ( t ) , µ ( t +1) − F π ( t ) , µ ( t )
                                     
             ≤ Pr µ(t+1) ̸= µ(t)
               m̃
                                                                                                      
                                                   (t)          ( t +1) (t)     ( t +1)
             = Pr S(t) = S(t+1) ∏ Pr âB\ f a( B) = âB\ f a( B) â f a( B) = â f a( B) , S(t) = S(t+1)
                     m̃                      m̃
                                       B∈T
              (i )
              ≤ 1 − exp (2η |T |) .
(i) is because choosing S(t) is equivalent to adding a new player in the root bag Br , whose action is to
select the coalition. Finally, for any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                  T                                          
                                ∑ F π (t) , µ̂ − F π (t) , µ(t)
                               t =1
                                                                                      r
                                     1 + (tw(G) + 1) log A                                      1
                             ≤2 |T |                       + 2η |T | T +                  2T log .
                                              η                                                 δ

                                                                      40
G.3     Proof of Auxiliary Lemmas

Lemma G.1. Consider the update rule (7.3). For any timestep t = 1, 2, . . . , T, bag B ∈ T , joint action
âB ∈ A B , coalition S ∈ S , and noise m̃ ∈ R×B∈T AB , we have
                                                       ( t +1)                      (t)
                                                   gS            ( B, âB ) − gS ( B, âB ) ≤ 1.

                                                                     ( t +1)                  (t)
Proof. For any S ∈ S , the upper bound of gS                                   ( B, âB ) − gS ( B, âB ) can be obtained similarly to the
proof of Lemma F.3 by choosing

             (t)                  1 t                                                                             
                                 |S| τ∑          ∑                ∑ π (τ) (a) Ui âB∩S , aB\S − Ui (aB )
           u i (aN ( i ) ) =                                                                                             for i ∈ [ N ]
                                      =1         i ∈S :    a∈A
                                           i assigned to B
             (t)
           ui (aN (i) ) = mS ( B, aN (i) ) for i as the noise player assigned to bag B.

Then,


          (t)                ( t +1)                     1                                                                            
         u i (aN ( i ) ) − u i         (aN ( i ) ) =
                                                        |S|           ∑              ∑ π (t+1) (a) Ui âB∩S , aB\S − Ui (aB )
                                                                       i ∈S :    a∈A
                                                                 i assigned to B
                                                 (i ) 1
                                                 ≤
                                                       |S|          ∑               ∑ π ( t +1) (a ) .
                                                                   i ∈S :    a∈A
                                                             i assigned to B
                                      
(i) is by the fact that Ui âB∩S , aB\S , Ui (aB ) ∈ [0, 1]. The rest of the proof follows that of Lemma F.3,
and thus we complete the proof.


H       Additional Experimental Results

In this section, we detail our experimental setup and report additional results for two further games: the
Chicken game (Bergstrom and Godfrey-Smith, 1998) and Pigou’s network (Pigou, 2017). All experiments
are conducted on a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-13700K @ 3.40 GHz. Error bars for MASE and FTPL
indicate ±1σ over 100 random seeds (0, 1, . . . , 99). Across all experiments, we set the learning rate to
η = 0.01 and run for T = 10, 000 timesteps.


H.1     Experimental Details

For all baselines, we run each algorithm independently for each player, thus the average strategy con-
verges to a CCE (Hazan et al., 2016). For FTRL, Hedge, and OMD, each player i ∈ [ N ] is initialized with
                                  (1)
a uniform distribution πi over all actions. MASE and FTPL are initialized with a pure strategy chosen
uniformly at random from all pure strategies.


H.2     Utility Functions

This subsection specifies the utility functions for all four games.


                                                                               41
Prisoner’s Dilemma. The utility matrix is shown in Table 2. If both prisoners confess, they receive
reduced sentences. If one confesses while the other defects, the confessor is imprisoned and the defector
is released immediately. If both defect, both are imprisoned for longer than in the mutual-confession
case to penalize dishonesty.

                                               Confess (C)      Defect (D)
                                Confess (C)     (0.6, 0.6)         (0, 1)
                                Defect (D)        (1, 0)         (0.2, 0.2)

Table 2: Utility matrix of Prisoner’s Dilemma. Each entry ( a, b) denotes the payoffs to the row player (a)
and the column player (b).


Stag Hunt. The utility matrix is shown in Table 3. A stag yields a higher reward, but it can only be
hunted successfully if both players choose Stag; a solo stag attempt yields nothing. A hare provides a
smaller payoff but can be secured by a single player.

                                                 Stag (S)     Hare (H)
                                    Stag (S)       (1, 1)     (0.1, 0.8)
                                    Hare (H)     (0.8, 0.1)   (0.5, 0.5)

Table 3: Utility matrix of the Stag Hunt. Each entry ( a, b) denotes the payoff of the row player (a) and
the column player (b).


Chicken Game. Two drivers head toward each other and can either swerve or go straight. If one goes
straight while the other swerves, the swerving player "loses". If both go straight, they crash.

                                               Swerve (Sw)      Straight (St)
                              Swerve (Sw)       (5/6, 5/6)        (2/3, 1)
                              Straight (St)      (1, 2/3)           (0, 0)

Table 4: Utility matrix of the Chicken game. Each entry ( a, b) denotes the payoff of the row player (a)
and the column player (b).


Pigou Network. We use a three-player variant of Pigou’s network. Each player chooses a fast or
slow route. The slow route yields a constant utility of 0.25. The fast route yields utility 1.5 − 0.5 ·
(number of players choosing the fast route), reflecting congestion.


H.3    Additional Experimental Results

Figure 8 reports additional experiments on the Chicken game and Pigou’s network. MASE consistently
outperforms the baselines in both coalition exploitability and social welfare. In Pigou’s network, purely
self-interested players overuse the fast route, which in equilibrium becomes slow. By contrast, when
players form coalitions and consider average utility within a coalition, they share the routes so that
everyone is better off.
Figure 9 shows the trade-off between exploitability and social welfare in the Chicken game and Pigou’s
network.


                                                    42
                                                                                   Chicken Game
                                                                                    0.6                                                                           2.0




                                                                  Coalition Expl.




                                                                                                                                                 Social Welfare
  Exploitability
                   0.4
                                                                                    0.4                                                                           1.5
                   0.2                                                              0.2                                                                           1.0
                   0.0                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                    0        5000 10000                                   0         5000 10000                                                          0      5000 10000
                                          Timestep (t)                                           Timestep (t)                                                               Timestep (t)
                                                                               Pigou's Network
                   0.4                                                                                                                                          1.6
                                                                 Coalition Expl.




                                                                                                                                               Social Welfare
  Exploitability




                                                                                    0.4
                   0.3                                                                                                                                          1.4
                                                                                    0.3
                   0.2                                                                                                                                          1.2
                                                                                    0.2
                   0.1                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                    0.1
                   0.0                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                    0        5000 10000                                   0          5000 10000                                                         0      5000 10000
                                          Timestep (t)                                            Timestep (t)                                                              Timestep (t)

                                                    MASE                            FTRL                              Hedge                                       Optimal CCE
                                                    FTPL                            OMD                               LP                                          Maximum

Figure 8: LP refers to the linear program in Section A. Maximum marks the maximum social welfare.
MASE outperforms the baselines in both games in terms of coalition exploitability and social welfare.

                                                     Trade-off between Exploitability and Social Welfare

                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                Social Welfare




                                                                                                                                                                                          Social Welfare
                   Exploitability




                                                                                                                      Exploitability




                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                          1.7
                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                       0.1                                          1.4
                                                                                          1.6
                                    0.0                                                                                                0.0
                                         0.0            0.5            1.0                                                                0.0            0.5            1.0
                                        Weight on Individual Rationality (w)                                                             Weight on Individual Rationality (w)
                                                  Chicken Game                                                                                          Pigou’s Network

Figure 9: The trade-off between exploitability and social welfare in the Chicken game and the Pigou’s
network.                                           1




                                                                                                                 43
Figure 10 reports the runtime of the algorithm for polymatrix games with varying numbers of players,
action set sizes, and interaction densities.

                                                                 Runtime (seconds).
                         600                                                                                1000
    Runtime (seconds).




                                                           300
                         400                                                                                    500
                                                           200

                         200                                                                                      0
                                                           100


                           0                                 0                                              −500

                                      50             100          2      3          4                   5              1               2               3
                               Number of Players (N)                    Action Size (A)                               Expected Interactions per Player (c)


                                                           MASE              FTRL                       Hedge
                                                           FTPL              OMD


                                 Figure 10: The runtime of the algorithm in different polymatrix games.
                                                                    1



I          Polymatrix Games

In this section, we present experimental details for MASE on games with a larger number of players. We
select polymatrix games as the benchmark for these large-scale experiments. This choice is motivated
by their inherent graphical structure, which allows for the efficient generation of instances with a low
treewidth of their Utility Dependency Graph.
We begin with the formal definition. A polymatrix game has a corresponding undirected graph G U =
(V U , E U ), with V U = [ N ]. For any joint action a ∈ A, the utility of any player i is defined as:

                                                           Ui (a) :=     ∑         Ui,j ( ai , a j ),                                                    (I.1)
                                                                       (i,j)∈E U

where Ui,j : Ai × A j → [0, 1] represents the interaction between players i and j. In other words, only
players who are connected in G U interact, and a player’s total utility is the summation of these pairwise
interactions.
If we construct the Utility Dependency Graph directly, then the tree decomposition may explode unwill-
ingly, e.g., Figure 11 (a). We can see that the treewidth of G U is one while the treewidth of the Utility
Dependency Graph is three.
Constructing the Utility Dependency Graph directly from the polymatrix game can cause its treewidth to
explode. For example, in Figure 11 (a), the original graph G U has a treewidth of one, while the resulting
Utility Dependency Graph has a treewidth of three.
To prevent this, we construct a strategically equivalent game (note that this new game is not a polymatrix
game). This construction explicitly models the pairwise interactions as new players:

    • For any original edge (i, j) ∈ E U , we introduce two edge players, ei,j and e j,i .

    • Each edge player ei,j has a singleton action set, Aei,j = 1, meaning it has only a single strategy.


                                                                          44
                                                            𝒢𝒢 𝑼𝑼                                     Utility Dependence Graph

                                                            2                                                                 2




                                                            1                                                                 1




                                     3                                                 4               3                                                 4


                                                                                           (a)
                                                            2                                                                     2


                                              𝒆𝒆𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏                 𝒆𝒆𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐                                         𝒆𝒆𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏                 𝒆𝒆𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐


                                                            1                                                                     1
                                         𝒆𝒆𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏                               𝒆𝒆𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏                           𝒆𝒆𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏                               𝒆𝒆𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏

                                                   𝒆𝒆𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟑       𝒆𝒆𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒                                                   𝒆𝒆𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟑       𝒆𝒆𝟒𝟒𝟒𝟒
                                     3                                                 4                   3                                                 4

                                                                                           (b)



Figure 11: (a) The original graph G U corresponding to the polymatrix game (left) and the Utility Depen-
dency Graph. (b) The strategically equivalent game and its Utility Dependency Graph.


      • The utility function of an edge player ei,j is defined as the original interaction utility: Ũei,j = Ui,j .

      • The utility function of an original vertex player i (one of the original N players) is now a constant
        zero: Ũi ≡ 0.

This transformation is illustrated in Figure 11 (b). The Utility Dependency Graph for this new game,
shown on the right of Figure 11 (b), now has a treewidth of max tw(G U ), 2 . This method effectively
bounds the treewidth and avoids the undesirable explosion.
Next, we show that the new game and the original polymatrix game are strategically equivalent. In
other words, for any joint strategy π ∈ ∆A , the maximum average deviation gain, maxS∈S maxâS ∈AS
 1
         E
|S| ∑i ∈S a∼π [Ui ( S −S )
                   â , a  − Ui (a)], does not change. Recall that since the edge players have only a
single action, π ∈ ∆A (a distribution over the original players’ joint actions) is sufficient to specify the
joint strategy in both games.
Lemma
n        I.1. The newogame described above is equivalent to the original polymatrix game, when S̃ =
                         . Formally, for any joint strategy π ∈ ∆A , we have
     
  S ∪ ei,j i∈S∧(i,j)∈E U
                            S∈S

                                            1
                          max max
                          S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                                ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                                                1                 h                                     i
                        = max max                       ∑
                          S̃∈S̃ âS̃ ∈AS̃ | S̃ ∩ [ N ]| i ∈S̃
                                                              Ea∼π Ũi âS̃∩[ N ] , a−(S̃∩[ N ]) − Ũi (a) .


The proof is postponed to the end of this section. This equivalence allows us to solve the new game
instead of the original one. Our algorithm can minimize a more general objective, maxS∈S maxâS ∈AS wS
∑i∈S Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)], for any weight vector w ∈ RS .15 We can therefore apply our algorithm
to this new, strategically equivalent game.


I.1     Experimental Details

We generate random polymatrix games using the following procedure:
 15 Both the implementation and the proof only use the linearity of the objective.                                                                               Hence, any weighted sum can fit into the
framework.


                                                                                                 45
                                                                                   c
      • Each pair of players (i, j) is connected independently with probability N −  1 , where N is the total
        number of players. This results in an expected degree of c for each player in G U .

      • For each connected pair (i, j), the interaction utilities Ui,j ( ai , a j ) are sampled independently and
        uniformly from [0, 1] for all action pairs ai ∈ Ai , a j ∈ A j . These pairwise utilities are then normal-
        ized according to the formula:

                                                    Ui,j ( ai , a j ) − mink∈[ N ],â∈A Uk (â)
                                                                                                  .
                                            maxk∈[ N ],â∈A Uk (â) − mink∈[ N ],â∈A Uk (â)

        This process ensures that the final total utility Ui (a) for any player i ∈ [ N ] and joint action a ∈ A
        falls within the within the range [0, 1].

Consistent with the experiments on small games, we average the results over 100 runs for each hyper-
parameter setting (using seeds 0–99). All algorithms use a learning rate of η = 0.01, and error bars
represent 1 σ. For these larger games, we set the number of timesteps to T = 100, 000 and a uniform
action set size |Ai | = A for all players i ∈ [ N ].
The hyper-parameters for the ablation studies are as follows:

      • Ablation on N: A = 2 and c = 1.

      • Ablation on A: N = 30 and c = 1.

      • Ablation on c: N = 30 and A = 2.

Furthermore, to accelerate the algorithm, without loss of generality, we only need to consider S =
{{i }}i∈[ N ] ∪ {i, j} | i, j ∈ [ N ], (i, j) ∈ G U to minimize the coalition exploitability for any coalitions with
no more than two players. In other words, for coalitions of two players, we only need to consider the
case when they are connected in G U . As shown in the following lemma.

Lemma I.2. For any joint strategy π ∈ ∆A , by letting S = {{i }}i∈[ N ] ∪ {i, j} | i, j ∈ [ N ] ∧ (i, j) ∈ G U ,
                                                                                   

we have
                                           1
                             max max           ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                             S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S

                                                                 1
                         =            max
                                 S∈{{i }}i∈[ N ]
                                                        max           ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] .
                                                        âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                             ∪{{i,j} | i,j∈[ N ]∧i̸= j}


The proof is postponed to the end of this section.


I.2     Proof of the Auxiliary Lemma

Lemma
n        I.1. The newogame described above is equivalent to the original polymatrix game, when S̃ =
                         . Formally, for any joint strategy π ∈ ∆A , we have
     
  S ∪ ei,j i∈S∧(i,j)∈E U
                           S∈S

                                           1
                         max max
                         S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                               ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                                               1                 h                                     i
                       = max max                       ∑
                         S̃∈S̃ âS̃ ∈AS̃ | S̃ ∩ [ N ]| i ∈S̃
                                                             Ea∼π Ũi âS̃∩[ N ] , a−(S̃∩[ N ]) − Ũi (a) .


                                                                      46
Proof. For any S ∈ S , let S̃ be its correspondence in S̃ . Then,

                                                1                 h                                      i
                                 max
                                âS̃ ∈AS̃ | S̃ ∩ [ N ]|
                                                        ∑     Ea∼π Ũi âS̃∩[ N ] , a−(S̃∩[ N ]) − Ũi (a)
                                                        i ∈S̃
                         (i )           1
                                            ∑     Ea∼π Ũi (âS , a−S ) − Ũi (a)
                                                                                              
                         = max
                              âS ∈AS | S |
                                            i ∈S̃
                        (ii )           1                               h                                            i
                        = max               ∑ ∑
                              âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                                                                E a ∼ π   Ũ e i,j
                                                                                   ( â S , a − S ) − Ũ e i,j
                                                                                                               ( a )
                                                  j : (i,j)∈E U
                       (iii)              1
                        = max                 ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] .
                                âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S


(i) uses the fact that |Aei,j | = 1 and S̃ ∩ [ N ] = S. (ii ) is because Ui ≡ 0 for any i ∈ [ N ]. (iii ) is by the
definition of Ũei,j and S̃.

Lemma I.2. For any joint strategy π ∈ ∆A , by letting S = {{i }}i∈[ N ] ∪ {i, j} | i, j ∈ [ N ] ∧ (i, j) ∈ G U ,
                                                                               

we have
                                            1
                              max max           ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)]
                              S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S

                                                                    1
                       =               max
                                  S∈{{i }}i∈[ N ]
                                                         max             ∑ Ea∼π [Ui (âS , a−S ) − Ui (a)] .
                                                         âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S
                              ∪{{i,j} | i,j∈[ N ]∧i̸= j}


Proof. For any disconnected players i, j and S = {i, j}, we can see that

                                        1
                               max          ∑ Ea∼π [Uk (âS , a−S ) − Uk (a)]
                              âS ∈AS | S | k∈S

                       ≤ max max Ea∼π [Uk (âS , a−S ) − Uk (a)]
                              âS ∈AS k∈S
                       = max max Ea∼π [Uk (âS , a−S ) − Uk (a)]
                         k ∈S âS ∈AS
                                                                                                                        

                       = max max Ea∼π 
                              k ∈S âS ∈AS
                                                                    ∑                Uk,k′ (âS , a−S ) − Uk,k′ (a)
                                                           k′ ∈[ N ] : (k,k′ )∈G U
                                                                                                                        
                       (i )
                       = max max Ea∼π 
                              k ∈S âS ∈AS
                                                                    ∑                Uk,k′ (âk , a−k ) − Uk,k′ (a)
                                                           k′ ∈[ N ] : (k,k′ )∈G U

                       = max max Ea∼π [Uk (âk , a−k ) − Uk (a)] .
                              k ∈S âS ∈AS

(i) is because k′ ̸∈ S since k ∈ S = {i, j} and i, j are not connected. Therefore, since the coalition
exploitability of S is upper bounded by the maximum of that of coalitions {i } and { j}, we do not need
to consider {i, j}.
Actually, the argument can be generalized to coalitions of any size M. If we want to consider the coalition
exploitability for coalitions no more than size M, then we only need to consider all connected coalitions
of size no more than size M by an induction similar to the proof above.




                                                                         47
J      Omitted Proofs for Section 9

Lemma 9.2. In any game, EWFCCE is non-decreasing, concave, and piecewise linear as a function of ϵ.

Proof. First, note that the set of ϵ-CCEs is a polytope. In particular, it can be written as
                                          n                                  o
                                 ϵ-CCE = 1⊤ π = 1 ∧ Bπ ≤ ϵ ∧ π ≥ 0 ,

where 1 ∈ RA denotes the all-ones vector. Moreover, social welfare is linear in π, and can be expressed
as c⊤ π for some vector c ∈ RA . Hence, for a fixed ϵ, computing an optimal π ∈ ϵ-CCE is equivalent to
the linear program

                                                                 max c⊤ π
                                                         s.t.    1⊤ π = 1                           (Primal)
                                                                 Bπ ≤ ϵ
                                                                 π ≥ 0.

As the feasible set expands with increasing ϵ, the EWF is non-decreasing. The dual of the linear program
above is

                                               min      λ + ϵ · 1⊤ µ
                                                λ,µ

                                                 s.t.   λ 1 + B ⊤ µ ≥ c,                             (Dual)
                                                        µ ≥ 0,         λ ∈ R (free).

The primal is feasible and bounded for every ϵ ≥ 0 (every Nash equilibrium exists (Nash, 1950) and is
a CCE), so by strong duality the primal and dual attain the same optimal value. Importantly, the dual
feasible region does not depend on ϵ, and we denote it by D . Since the dual optimum is finite by strong
duality, it is attained at a vertex of D . Because D ’s vertex set Vertex(D) is finite, we obtain

                                         EWFCCE (ϵ) =             min        λ + ϵ · 1⊤ µ.
                                                           (λ,µ)∈Vertex(D)

Finally, EWFCCE is the pointwise minimum of finitely many linear functions of ϵ, and is therefore piece-
wise linear and concave.

Lemma 9.3. The slope of the EWFCCE can be as small as zero and is unbounded above.

Proof. In the Stag Hunt, the slope can be zero because a social-welfare-maximizing joint strategy is itself
a Nash equilibrium. Next, we give an example in which the slope is unbounded.

                                                           Confess (C)        Defect (D)
                                         Confess (C)        (0.6, 0.6)        (0.2 − ζ, 1)
                                         Defect (D)        (1, 0.2 − ζ )       (0.2, 0.2)

Table 5: Utility matrix for a variant of Prisoner’s Dilemma, where ζ > 0 is a constant. Each entry ( a, b)
gives the payoff to the row player (a) and the column player (b).

Consider the variant of Prisoner’s Dilemma in Table 5. It is straightforward to verify that the unique CCE
remains ( D, D ). Now consider the following strategy16 , which is a linear mixture of the pure strategies
    16 In fact, this strategy is not correlated, so Lemma 9.3 extends to EWFNE and EWFCE as well.




                                                                 48
( D, D ) and (C, D ).

                                                  (1 − p) · ( D, D ) + p · (C, D ).

Its social welfare equals

                                     0.4(1 − p) + (1.2 − ζ ) p = 0.4 + (0.8 − ζ ) p,

while its exploitability is ζ · p. Hence, the slope at ϵ = 0 is at least

                                              0.4 + (0.8 − ζ ) p − 0.4   0.8 − ζ
                                                                       =         .
                                                    ζ · p − 0.0             ζ

Letting ζ → 0 makes this ratio diverge, so the slope can be arbitrarily large.

Lemma 9.5. For any ϵ > 0, computing the CCE with exploitability no more than ϵ that maximizes social
welfare is equivalent to (9.3) by setting S = {{i }}i∈[ N ] ∪ {[ N ]} and using the weights:
                                                                (
                                                                    w        if |S| = 1
                                                    wS =
                                                                    1−w      if S = [ N ]

for some w ∈ [0, 1). Conversely, solving (9.3) with these parameters corresponds to finding a point on
the Pareto frontier of social welfare and exploitability.

Proof. For any ϵ > 0, let π ∗ be the strategy that maximizes social welfare subject to its exploitability
being at most ϵ. Let g∗ = maxâ∈A N1 ∑iN=1 Ea∼π ∗ [Ui (â) − Ui (a)] be the maximum gain for the grand
                            g∗
coalition [ N ]. Let w = ϵ+ g∗ . Then, by construction, the objective value for π ∗ under (9.3) is:

                                 wS
                   max max            ∑ Ea∼π∗ [. . . ] = max (w · (exploitability), (1 − w) · g∗ )
                    S∈S âS ∈AS | S | i ∈S

                                                                                              ϵg∗
                                                                ≤ max (wϵ, (1 − w) g∗ ) =          .
                                                                                            ϵ + g∗
                                                                                                   ϵg∗
Any strategy π̂ with exploitability > ϵ would have an objective value > wϵ = ϵ+ g∗ , which is worse than
the value π ∗ achieves. Therefore, any optimal solution to (9.3) must have exploitability at most ϵ. Since
π ∗ by definition maximizes social welfare (i.e., minimizes the coalition gain g∗ ) among all strategies in
this set, it must also be an optimal solution to (9.3).
Conversely, for any w ∈ [0, 1), let π ∗ be the corresponding strategy that optimizes (9.3). Let its ex-
ploitability be

                                    ϵ = max max Ea∼π ∗ [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)] .
                                             i ∈[ N ] âi ∈Ai

We will show by contradiction that no strategy π ′ exists such that exploitability(π ′ ) ≤ ϵ and SW (π ′ ) >
SW (π ∗ ) (which implies g′ < g∗ , where g′ is the gain for the grand coalition under π ′ ).
Suppose such a π ′ exists. We analyze two cases:


Case 1: exploitability(π ′ ) < ϵ. Since π ′ has both strictly lower exploitability than π ∗ and g′ < g∗
(higher social welfare), its objective value is max(w · exploitability(π ′ ), (1 − w) g′ ). This is strictly less
than max(wϵ, (1 − w) g∗ ), which is the objective value of π ∗ . This contradicts the optimality of π ∗ .


                                                                        49
Case 2: exploitability(π ′ ) = ϵ. If ϵ > 0, choose a small δ > 0 and consider the mixed strategy
πnew = (1 − δ)π ′ + δπ ′′ , where π ′′ is an arbitrary CCE, which is guaranteed to exist (Nash, 1950). For
any i ∈ [ N ] and âi ∈ Ai , we have:

                          Ea∼πnew [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)]
                   =(1 − δ)Ea∼π ′ [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)] + δEa∼π ′′ [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)]
                   (i )
                   ≤(1 − δ)Ea∼π ′ [Ui ( âi , a−i ) − Ui (a)]
                   ≤(1 − δ)ϵ.

Step (i ) holds because π ′′ is a CCE, so its exploitability Eπ ′′ [. . . ] is ≤ 0. Since ϵ > 0, the new strategy
πnew has exploitability(πnew ) < ϵ. By continuity, for sufficiently small δ, SW (πnew ) remains strictly
higher than SW (π ∗ ) (since SW (π ′ ) > SW (π ∗ )). This puts us in Case 1, which leads to a contradiction.
If ϵ ≤ 0, then exploitability(π ∗ ) ≤ 0. The objective value for π ∗ is max(wϵ, (1 − w) g∗ ) = (1 − w) g∗ (since
wϵ ≤ 0 and (1 − w) g∗ ≥ 0 by definition). The hypothetical strategy π ′ has exploitability(π ′ ) = ϵ ≤ 0
and g′ < g∗ . Its objective value is max(wϵ, (1 − w) g′ ) = (1 − w) g′ . Since g′ < g∗ and w < 1, the objective
value of π ′ is strictly less than that of π ∗ , which contradicts the optimality of π ∗ .
In all cases, the existence of such a π ′ leads to a contradiction. Thus, π ∗ must be a solution that
maximizes social welfare for a given exploitability ϵ.

Lemma 9.6. Computing EWFCCE (0) is NP-hard in each of the following succinct games:

   1. Bounded-degree, bipartite graphical games.

   2. Polymatrix games.

   3. Hypergraphical games.

   4. Congestion games.

   5. Local effect games.

   6. Facility location games.

   7. Network design games.

   8. Scheduling games.

Proof. The proof follows from Theorem 5.10 of Papadimitriou and Roughgarden (2008), which shows
that for each of the succinct game classes listed above, deciding whether a dominant outcome exists, i.e.,
whether there is a joint strategy at which every player attains that player’s maximum utility, is NP-hard.
We reduce this decision problem to computing EWFCCE (0).
Let M := ∑iN=1 maxa∈A Ui (a). The quantity M can be computed efficiently in all of the above games
(Papadimitriou and Roughgarden, 2008). If a dominant outcome exists, then the corresponding joint
strategy is a CCE, implying EWFCCE (0) = M. Conversely, if no dominant outcome exists, then no CCE
can achieve every player’s maximum utility simultaneously, and thus

                                                     EWFCCE (0) < M.

Therefore, computing EWFCCE (0) decides whether a dominant outcome exists, establishing NP-hardness.




                                                                50
